　　I discovered, too, that a great pleasure, an enjoyment which thehorizon only bounded, lay all outside the high and spike-guarded wallsof our garden: this pleasure consisted in prospect of noble summitsgirdling a great hill-hollow, rich in verdure and shadow; in abright beck, full of dark stones and sparkling eddies. How differenthad this scene looked when I viewed it laid out beneath the iron skyof winter, stiffened in frost, shrouded with snow!- when mists aschill as death wandered to the impulse of east winds along thosepurple peaks, and rolled down 'ing' and holm till they blended withthe frozen fog of the beck! That beck itself was then a torrent,turbid and curbless: it tore asunder the wood, and sent a raving soundthrough the air, often thickened with wild rain or whirling sleet; andfor the forest on its banks, that showed only ranks of skeletons.

　　April advanced to May: a bright, serene May it was; days of bluesky, placid sunshine, and soft western or southern gales filled up itsduration. And now vegetation matured with vigour; Lowood shook looseits tresses; it became all green, all flowery; its great elm, ash, andoak skeletons were restored to majestic life; woodland plants sprangup profusely in its recesses; unnumbered varieties of moss filledits hollows, and it made a strange ground-sunshine out of the wealthof its wild primrose plants: I have seen their pale gold gleam inovershadowed spots like scatterings of the sweetest lustre. All this Ienjoyed often and fully, free, unwatched, and almost alone: for thisunwonted liberty and pleasure there was a cause, to which it nowbecomes my task to advert.

　　Have I not described a pleasant site for a dwelling, when I speakof it as bosomed in hill and wood, and rising from the verge of astream? Assuredly, pleasant enough: but whether healthy or not isanother question.

　　That forest-dell, where Lowood lay, was the cradle of fog andfog-bred pestilence; which, quickening with the quickening spring,crept into the Orphan Asylum, breathed typhus through its crowdedschoolroom and dormitory, and, ere May arrived, transformed theseminary into an hospital.

　　Semi-starvation and neglected colds had predisposed most of thepupils to receive infection: forty-five out of the eighty girls layill at one time. Classes were broken up, rules relaxed. The few whocontinued well were allowed almost unlimited license; because themedical attendant insisted on the necessity of frequent exercise tokeep them in health: and had it been otherwise, no one had leisureto watch or restrain them. Miss Temple's whole attention wasabsorbed by the patients: she lived in the sick-room, never quittingit except to snatch a few hours' rest at night. The teachers werefully occupied with packing up and making other necessary preparationsfor the departure of those girls who were fortunate enough to havefriends and relations able and willing to remove them from the seat ofcontagion. Many, already smitten, went home only to die: some diedat the school, and were buried quietly and quickly, the nature ofthe malady forbidding delay.

　　While disease had thus become an inhabitant of Lowood, and deathits frequent visitor; while there was gloom and fear within its walls;while its rooms and passages steamed with hospital smells, the drugand the pastille striving vainly to overcome the effluvia ofmortality, that bright May shone unclouded over the bold hills andbeautiful woodland out of doors. Its garden, too, glowed with flowers:hollyhocks had sprung up tall as trees, lilies had opened, tulipsand roses were in bloom; the borders of the little beds were gaywith pink thrift and crimson double daisies; the sweetbriars gave out,morning and evening, their scent of spice and apples; and thesefragrant treasures were all useless for most of the inmates of Lowood,except to furnish now and then a handful of herbs and blossoms toput in a coffin.

　　But I, and the rest who continued well, enjoyed fully thebeauties of the scene and season; they let us ramble in the wood, likegipsies, from morning till night; we did what we liked, went wherewe liked: we lived better too. Mr. Brocklehurst and his family nevercame near Lowood now: household matters were not scrutinised into; thecross housekeeper was gone, driven away by the fear of infection;her successor, who had been matron at the Lowton Dispensary, unused tothe ways of her new abode, provided with comparative liberality.Besides, there were fewer to feed; the sick could eat little; ourbreakfast-basins were better filled; when there was no time to preparea regular dinner, which often happened, she would give us a largepiece of cold pie, or a thick slice of bread and cheese, and this wecarried away with us to the wood, where we each chose the spot weliked best, and dined sumptuously.

　　My favourite seat was a smooth and broad stone, rising white anddry from the very middle of the beck, and only to be got at bywading through the water; a feat I accomplished barefoot. The stonewas just broad enough to accommodate, comfortably, another girl andme, at that time my chosen comrade- one Mary Ann Wilson; a shrewd,observant personage, whose society I took pleasure in, partlybecause she was witty and original, and partly because she had amanner which set me at my ease. Some years older than I, she knew moreof the world, and could tell me many things I liked to hear: withher my curiosity found gratification: to my faults also she gave ampleindulgence, never imposing curb or rein on anything I said. She hada turn for narrative, I for analysis; she liked to inform, I toquestion; so we got on swimmingly together, deriving muchentertainment, if not much improvement, from our mutual intercourse.

　　And where, meantime, was Helen Burns? Why did I not spend thesesweet days of liberty with her? Had I forgotten her? or was I soworthless as to have grown tired of her pure society? Surely theMary Ann Wilson I have mentioned was inferior to my firstacquaintance: she could only tell me amusing stories, andreciprocate any racy and pungent gossip I chose to indulge in;while, if I have spoken truth of Helen, she was qualified to givethose who enjoyed the privilege of her converse a taste of farhigher things.

　　True, reader; and I knew and felt this: and though I am a defectivebeing, with many faults and few redeeming points, yet I never tired ofHelen Burns; nor ever ceased to cherish for her a sentiment ofattachment, as strong, tender, and respectful as any that everanimated my heart. How could it be otherwise, when Helen, at all timesand under all circumstances, evinced for me a quiet and faithfulfriendship, which ill-humour never soured, nor irritation nevertroubled? But Helen was ill at present: for some weeks she had beenremoved from my sight to I knew not what room upstairs. She was not, Iwas told, in the hospital portion of the house with the feverpatients; for her complaint was consumption, not typhus: and byconsumption I, in my ignorance, understood something mild, whichtime and care would be sure to alleviate.

　　I was confirmed in this idea by the fact of her once or twicecoming downstairs on very warm sunny afternoons, and being taken byMiss Temple into the garden; but, on these occasions, I was notallowed to go and speak to her; I only saw her from the schoolroomwindow, and then not distinctly; for she was much wrapped up, andsat at a distance under the verandah.

　　One evening, in the beginning of June, I had stayed out very latewith Mary Ann in the wood; we had, as usual, separated ourselvesfrom the others, and had wandered far; so far that we lost our way,and had to ask it at a lonely cottage, where a man and woman lived,who looked after a herd of half-wild swine that fed on the mast in thewood. When we got back, it was after moonrise: a pony, which we knewto be the surgeon's, was standing at the garden door. Mary Annremarked that she supposed some one must be very ill, as Mr. Bates hadbeen sent for at that time of the evening. She went into the house;I stayed behind a few minutes to plant in my garden a handful of rootsI had dug up in the forest, and which I feared would wither if Ileft them till the morning. This done, I lingered yet a little longer:the flowers smelt so sweet as the dew fell; it was such a pleasantevening, so serene, so warm; the still glowing west promised so fairlyanother fine day on the morrow; the moon rose with such majesty in thegrave east. I was noting these things and enjoying them as a childmight, when it entered my mind as it had never done before:-

　　'How sad to be lying now on a sick bed, and to be in danger ofdying! This world is pleasant- it would be dreary to be called fromit, and to have to go who knows where?'

　　And then my mind made its first earnest effort to comprehend whathad been infused into it concerning heaven and hell; and for the firsttime it recoiled, baffled; and for the first time glancing behind,on each side, and before it, it saw all round an unfathomed gulf: itfelt the one point where it stood- the present; all the rest wasformless cloud and vacant depth; and it shuddered at the thought oftottering, and plunging amid that chaos. While pondering this newidea, I heard the front door open; Mr. Bates came out, and with himwas a nurse. After she had seen him mount his horse and depart, shewas about to close the door, but I ran up to her.

　　'How is Helen Burns?'

　　'Very poorly,' was the answer.

　　'Is it her Mr. Bates has been to see?'

　　'Yes.'

　　'And what does he say about her?'

　　'He says she'll not be here long.'

　　This phrase, uttered in my hearing yesterday, would have onlyconveyed the notion that she was about to be removed toNorthumberland, to her own home. I should not have suspected that itmeant she was dying; but I knew instantly now! It opened clear on mycomprehension that Helen Burns was numbering her last days in thisworld, and that she was going to be taken to the region of spirits, ifsuch region there were. I experienced a shock of horror, then a strongthrill of grief, then a desire- a necessity to see her; and I asked inwhat room she lay.

　　'She is in Miss Temple's room,' said the nurse.

　　'May I go up and speak to her?'

　　'Oh no, child! It is not likely; and now it is time for you to comein; you'll catch the fever if you stop out when the dew is falling.'

　　The nurse closed the front door; I went in by the side entrancewhich led to the schoolroom: I was just in time; it was nineo'clock, and Miss Miller was calling the pupils to go to bed.

　　It might be two hours later, probably near eleven, when I- nothaving been able to fall asleep, and deeming, from the perfect silenceof the dormitory, that my companions were all wrapt in profoundrepose- rose softly, put on my frock over my night-dress, and, withoutshoes, crept from the apartment, and set off in quest of Miss Temple'sroom. It was quite at the other end of the house; but I knew my way;and the light of the unclouded summer moon, entering here and there atpassage windows, enabled me to find it without difficulty. An odour ofcamphor and burnt vinegar warned me when I came near the fever room:and I passed its door quickly, fearful lest the nurse who sat up allnight should hear me. I dreaded being discovered and sent back; forI must see Helen,- I must embrace her before she died,- I must giveher one last kiss, exchange with her one last word.

　　Having descended a staircase, traversed a portion of the housebelow, and succeeded in opening and shutting, without noise, twodoors, I reached another flight of steps; these I mounted, and thenjust opposite to me was Miss Temple's room. A light shone throughthe keyhole and from under the door; a profound stillness pervaded thevicinity. Coming near, I found the door slightly ajar; probably toadmit some fresh air into the close abode of sickness. Indisposed tohesitate, and full of impatient impulses- soul and senses quiveringwith keen throes- I put it back and looked in. My eye sought Helen,and feared to find death.

　　Close by Miss Temple's bed, and half covered with its whitecurtains, there stood a little crib. I saw the outline of a form underthe clothes, but the face was hid by the hangings: the nurse I hadspoken to in the garden sat in an easy-chair asleep; an unsnuffedcandle burnt dimly on the table. Miss Temple was not to be seen: Iknew afterwards that she had been called to a delirious patient in thefever-room. I advanced; then paused by the crib side: my hand was onthe curtain, but I preferred speaking before I withdrew it. I stillrecoiled at the dread of seeing a corpse.

　　'Helen!' I whispered softly, 'are you awake?'

　　She stirred herself, put back the curtain, and I saw her face,pale, wasted, but quite composed: she looked so little changed that myfear was instantly dissipated.

　　'Can it be you, Jane?' she asked, in her own gentle voice.

　　'Oh!' I thought, 'she is not going to die; they are mistaken: shecould not speak and look so calmly if she were.'

　　I got on to her crib and kissed her: her forehead was cold, and hercheek both cold and thin, and so were her hand and wrist; but shesmiled as of old.

　　'Why are you come here, Jane? It is past eleven o'clock: I heard itstrike some minutes since.'

　　'I came to see you, Helen: I heard you were very ill, and I couldnot sleep till I had spoken to you.'

　　'You came to bid me good-bye, then: you are just in time probably.'

　　'Are you going somewhere, Helen? Are you going home?'

　　'Yes; to my long home- my last home.'

　　'No, no, Helen!' I stopped, distressed. While I tried to devourmy tears, a fit of coughing seized Helen; it did not, however, wakethe nurse; when it was over, she lay some minutes exhausted; thenshe whispered-

　　'Jane, your little feet are bare; lie down and cover yourselfwith my quilt.'

　　I did so: she put her arm over me, and I nestled close to her.After a long silence, she resumed, still whispering-

　　'I am very happy, Jane; and when you hear that I am dead, youmust be sure and not grieve: there is nothing to grieve about. Weall must die one day, and the illness which is removing me is notpainful; it is gentle and gradual: my mind is at rest. I leave noone to regret me much: I have only a father; and he is lately married,and will not miss me. By dying young, I shall escape great sufferings.I had not qualities or talents to make my way very well in theworld: I should have been continually at fault.'

　　'But where are you going to, Helen? Can you see? Do you know?'

　　'I believe; I have faith: I am going to God.'

　　'Where is God? What is God?'

　　'My Maker and yours, who will never destroy what He created. I relyimplicitly on His power, and confide wholly in His goodness: I countthe hours till that eventful one arrives which shall restore me toHim, reveal Him to me.'

　　'You are sure, then, Helen, that there is such a place as heaven,and that our souls can get to it when we die?'

　　'I am sure there is a future state; I believe God is good; I canresign my immortal part to Him without any misgiving. God is myfather; God is my friend: I love Him; I believe He loves me.'

　　'And shall I see you again, Helen, when I die?'

　　'You will come to the same region of happiness: be received bythe same mighty, universal Parent, no doubt, dear Jane.'

　　Again I questioned, but this time only in thought. 'Where is thatregion? Does it exist?' And I clasped my arms closer around Helen; sheseemed dearer to me than ever; I felt as if I could not let her go;I lay with my face hidden on her neck. Presently she said, in thesweetest tone-

　　'How comfortable I am! That last fit of coughing has tired me alittle; I feel as if I could sleep: but don't leave me, Jane; I liketo have you near me.'

　　'I'll stay with you, dear Helen: no one shall take me away.'

　　'Are you warm, darling?'

　　'Yes.'

　　'Good-night, Jane.'

　　'Good-night, Helen.'

　　She kissed me, and I her, and we both soon slumbered.

　　When I awoke it was day: an unusual movement roused me; I lookedup; I was in somebody's arms; the nurse held me; she was carrying methrough the passage back to the dormitory. I was not reprimanded forleaving my bed; people had something else to think about; noexplanation was afforded then to my many questions; but a day or twoafterwards I learned that Miss Temple, on returning to her own room atdawn, had found me laid in the little crib; my face against HelenBurns's shoulder, my arms round her neck. I was asleep, and Helen was-dead.

　　Her grave is in Brocklebridge churchyard: for fifteen years afterher death it was only covered by a grassy mound; but now a grey marbletablet marks the spot, inscribed with her name, and the word'Resurgam.'

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER X--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　HITHERTO I have recorded in detail the events of my insignificantexistence: to the first ten years of my life I have given almost asmany chapters. But this is not to be a regular autobiography: I amonly bound to invoke Memory where I know her responses will possesssome degree of interest; therefore I now pass a space of eight yearsalmost in silence: a few lines only are necessary to keep up the linksof connection.

　　When the typhus fever had fulfilled its mission of devastation atLowood, it gradually disappeared from thence; but not till itsvirulence and the number of its victims had drawn public attentionon the school. Inquiry was made into the origin of the scourge, and bydegrees various facts came out which excited public indignation in ahigh degree. The unhealthy nature of the site; the quantity andquality of the children's food; the brackish, fetid water used inits preparation; the pupils' wretched clothing and accommodations- allthese things were discovered, and the discovery produced a resultmortifying to Mr. Brocklehurst, but beneficial to the institution.

　　Several wealthy and benevolent individuals in the county subscribedlargely for the erection of a more convenient building in a bettersituation; new regulations were made; improvements in diet andclothing introduced; the funds of the school were intrusted to themanagement of a committee. Mr. Brocklehurst, who, from his wealthand family connections, could not be overlooked, still retained thepost of treasurer; but he was aided in the discharge of his dutiesby gentlemen of rather more enlarged and sympathising minds: hisoffice of inspector, too, was shared by those who knew how tocombine reason with strictness, comfort with economy, compassionwith uprightness. The school, thus improved, became in time a trulyuseful and noble institution. I remained an inmate of its walls, afterits regeneration, for eight years: six as pupil, and two as teacher;and in both capacities I bear my testimony to its value andimportance.

　　During these eight years my life was uniform: but not unhappy,because it was not inactive. I had the means of an excellent educationplaced within my reach; a fondness for some of my studies, and adesire to excel in all, together with a great delight in pleasing myteachers, especially such as I loved, urged me on: I availed myselffully of the advantages offered me. In time I rose to be the firstgirl of the first class; then I was invested with the office ofteacher; which I discharged with zeal for two years: but at the end ofthat time I altered.

　　Miss Temple, through all changes, had thus far continuedsuperintendent of the seminary: to her instruction I owed the bestpart of my acquirements; her friendship and society had been mycontinual solace; she had stood me in the stead of mother,governess, and, latterly, companion. At this period she married,removed with her husband (a clergyman, an excellent man, almost worthyof such a wife) to a distant county, and consequently was lost to me.

　　From the day she left I was no longer the same: with her was goneevery settled feeling, every association that had made Lowood insome degree a home to me. I had imbibed from her something of hernature and much of her habits: more harmonious thoughts: what seemedbetter regulated feelings had become the inmates of my mind. I hadgiven in allegiance to duty and order; I was quiet; I believed I wascontent: to the eyes of others, usually even to my own, I appeared adisciplined and subdued character.

　　But destiny, in the shape of the Rev. Mr. Nasmyth, came betweenme and Miss Temple: I saw her in her travelling dress step into apost-chaise, shortly after the marriage ceremony; I watched the chaisemount the hill and disappear beyond its brow; and then retired to myown room, and there spent in solitude the greatest part of thehalf-holiday granted in honour of the occasion.

　　I walked about the chamber most of the time. I imagined myself onlyto be regretting my loss, and thinking how to repair it; but when myreflections were concluded, and I looked up and found that theafternoon was gone, and evening far advanced, another discovery dawnedon me, namely, that in the interval I had undergone a transformingprocess; that my mind had put off all it had borrowed of MissTemple- or rather that she had taken with her the serene atmosphereI had been breathing in her vicinity- and that now I was left in mynatural element, and beginning to feel the stirring of old emotions.It did not seem as if a prop were withdrawn, but rather as if a motivewere gone: it was not the power to be tranquil which had failed me,but the reason for tranquillity was no more. My world had for someyears been in Lowood: my experience had been of its rules and systems;now I remembered that the real world was wide, and that a varied fieldof hopes and fears, of sensations and excitements, awaited those whohad courage to go forth into its expanse, to seek real knowledge oflife amidst its perils.

　　I went to my window, opened it, and looked out. There were thetwo wings of the building; there was the garden; there were the skirtsof Lowood; there was the hilly horizon. My eye passed all otherobjects to rest on those most remote, the blue peaks; it was those Ilonged to surmount; all within their boundary of rock and heath seemedprison-ground, exile limits. I traced the white road winding round thebase of one mountain, and vanishing in a gorge between two; how Ilonged to follow it farther! I recalled the time when I hadtravelled that very road in a coach; I remembered descending that hillat twilight; an age seemed to have elapsed since the day which broughtme first to Lowood, and I had never quitted it since. My vacations hadall been spent at school: Mrs. Reed had never sent for me toGateshead; neither she nor any of her family had ever been to visitme. I had had no communication by letter or message with the outerworld: school-rules, school-duties, school-habits and notions, andvoices, and faces, and phrases, and costumes, and preferences, andantipathies- such was what I knew of existence. And now I felt that itwas not enough; I tired of the routine of eight years in oneafternoon. I desired liberty; for liberty I gasped; for liberty Iuttered a prayer; it seemed scattered on the wind then faintlyblowing. I abandoned it and framed a humbler supplication; for change,stimulus: that petition, too, seemed swept off into vague space:'Then,' I cried, half desperate, 'grant me at least a new servitude!'

　　Here a bell, ringing the hour of supper, called me downstairs.

　　I was not free to resume the interrupted chain of my reflectionstill bedtime: even then a teacher who occupied the same room with mekept me from the subject to which I longed to recur, by a prolongedeffusion of small talk. How I wished sleep would silence her. Itseemed as if, could I but go back to the idea which had last enteredmy mind as I stood at the window, some inventive suggestion would risefor my relief.

　　Miss Gryce snored at last; she was a heavy Welsh-woman, and tillnow her habitual nasal strains had never been regarded by me in anyother light than as a nuisance; to-night I hailed the first deep noteswith satisfaction; I was debarrassed of interruption; myhalf-effaced thought instantly revived.

　　'A new servitude! There is something in that,' I soliloquised(mentally, be it understood; I did not talk aloud). 'I know thereis, because it does not sound too sweet; it is not like such wordsas Liberty, Excitement, Enjoyment: delightful sounds truly; but nomore than sounds for me; and so hollow and fleeting that it is merewaste of time to listen to them. But Servitude! That must be matter offact. Any one may serve: I have served here eight years; now all Iwant is to serve elsewhere. Can I not get so much of my own will? Isnot the thing feasible? Yes- yes- the end is not so difficult; if Ihad only a brain active enough to ferret out the means of attainingit.'

　　I sat up in bed by way of arousing this said brain: it was a chillynight; I covered my shoulders with a shawl, and then I proceeded tothink again with all my might.

　　'What do I want? A new place, in a new house, amongst new faces,under new circumstances: I want this because it is of no use wantinganything better. How do people do to get a new place? They apply tofriends, I suppose: I have no friends. There are many others whohave no friends, who must look about for themselves and be their ownhelpers; and what is their resource?'

　　I could not tell: nothing answered me; I then ordered my brain tofind a response, and quickly. It worked and worked faster: I feltthe pulses throb in my head and temples; but for nearly an hour itworked in chaos; and no result came of its efforts. Feverish with vainlabour, I got up and took a turn in the room; undrew the curtain,noted a star or two, shivered with cold, and again crept to bed.

　　A kind fairy, in my absence, had surely dropped the requiredsuggestion on my pillow; for as I lay down, it came quietly andnaturally to my mind:- 'Those who want situations advertise; you

　　'How? I know nothing about advertising.'

　　Replies rose smooth and prompt now:-

　　'You must enclose the advertisement and the money to pay for itunder a cover directed to the editor of the Herald; you must put it,the first opportunity you have, into the post at Lowton; answersmust be addressed to J. E., at the post-office there; you can go andinquire in about a week after you send your letter, if any are come,and act accordingly.'

　　This scheme I went over twice, thrice; it was then digested in mymind; I had it in a clear practical form: I felt satisfied, and fellasleep.

　　With earliest day, I was up: I had my advertisement written,enclosed, and directed before the bell rang to rouse the school; itran thus:-

　　'A young lady accustomed to tuition' (had I not been a teachertwo years?) 'is desirous of meeting with a situation in a privatefamily where the children are under fourteen' (I thought that as I wasbarely eighteen, it would not do to undertake the guidance of pupilsnearer my own age). 'She is qualified to teach the usual branches of agood English education, together with French, Drawing, and Music'(in those days, reader, this now narrow catalogue ofaccomplishments, would have been held tolerably comprehensive).

　　This document remained locked in my drawer all day: after tea, Iasked leave of the new superintendent to go to Lowton, in order toperform some small commissions for myself and one or two of myfellow-teachers; permission was readily granted; I went. It was a walkof two miles, and the evening was wet, but the days were still long; Ivisited a shop or two, slipped the letter into the post-office, andcame back through heavy rain, with streaming garments, but with arelieved heart.

　　The succeeding week seemed long: it came to an end at last,however, like all sublunary things, and once more, towards the closeof a pleasant autumn day, I found myself afoot on the road toLowton. A picturesque track it was, by the way; lying along the sideof the beck and through the sweetest curves of the dale: but thatday I thought more of the letters, that might or might not be awaitingme at the little burgh whither I was bound, than of the charms oflea and water.

　　My ostensible errand on this occasion was to get measured for apair of shoes; so I discharged that business first, and when it wasdone, I stepped across the clean and quiet little street from theshoemaker's to the post-office: it was kept by an old dame, who worehorn spectacles on her nose, and black mittens on her hands.

　　'Are there any letters for J. E.?' I asked.

　　She peered at me over her spectacles, and then she opened adrawer and fumbled among its contents for a long time, so long that myhopes began to falter. At last, having held a document before herglasses for nearly five minutes, she presented it across thecounter, accompanying the act by another inquisitive and mistrustfulglance- it was for J. E.

　　'Is there only one?' I demanded.

　　'There are no more,' said she; and I put it in my pocket and turnedmy face homeward: I could not open it then; rules obliged me to beback by eight, and it was already half-past seven.

　　Various duties awaited me on my arrival: I had to sit with thegirls during their hour of study; then it was my turn to read prayers;to see them to bed: afterwards I supped with the other teachers.Even when we finally retired for the night, the inevitable MissGryce was still my companion: we had only a short end of candle in ourcandlestick, and I dreaded lest she should talk till it was allburnt out; fortunately, however, the heavy supper she had eatenproduced a soporific effect: she was already snoring before I hadfinished undressing. There still remained an inch of candle: I nowtook out my letter; the seal was an initial F.; I broke it; thecontents were brief.Thursday, possesses the acquirements mentioned, and if she is in aposition to give satisfactory references as to character andcompetency, a situation can be offered her where there is but onepupil, a little girl, under ten years of age; and where the salaryis thirty pounds per annum. J. E. is requested to send references,name, address, and all particulars to the direction:-

　　I examined the document long: the writing was old-fashioned andrather uncertain, like that of an elderly lady. This circumstancewas satisfactory: a private fear had haunted me, that in thus actingfor myself, and by my own guidance, I ran the risk of getting intosome scrape; and, above all things, I wished the result of myendeavours to be respectable, proper, en regle. I now felt that anelderly lady was no bad ingredient in the business I had on hand. Mrs.Fairfax! I saw her in a black gown and widow's cap; frigid, perhaps,but not uncivil: a model of elderly English respectability.Thornfield! that, doubtless, was the name of her house: a neat orderlyspot, I was sure; though I failed in my efforts to conceive arecollections of the map of England; yes, I saw it; both the shire andcounty where I now resided: that was a recommendation to me. Ilonged to go where there was life and movement: Millcote was a largedoubtless: so much the better; it would be a complete change at least.Not that my fancy was much captivated by the idea of long chimneys andclouds of smoke- 'but,' I argued, 'Thornfield will, probably, be agood way from the town.'

　　Here the socket of the candle dropped, and the wick went out.

　　Next day new steps were to be taken; my plans could no longer beconfined to my own breast; I must impart them in order to achievetheir success. Having sought and obtained an audience of thesuperintendent during the noontide recreation, I told her I had aprospect of getting a new situation where the salary would be doublewhat I now received (for at Lowood I only got L15 per annum); andrequested she would break the matter for me to Mr. Brocklehurst, orsome of the committee, and ascertain whether they would permit me tomention them as references. She obligingly consented to act asmediatrix in the matter. The next day she laid the affair before Mr.Brocklehurst, who said that Mrs. Reed must be written to, as she wasmy natural guardian. A note was accordingly addressed to that lady,who returned for answer, that 'I might do as I pleased: she had longrelinquished all interference in my affairs.' This note went the roundof the committee, and at last, after what appeared to me mosttedious delay, formal leave was given me to better my condition if Icould; and an assurance added, that as I had always conducted myselfwell, both as teacher and pupil, at Lowood, a testimonial of characterand capacity, signed by the inspectors of that institution, shouldforthwith be furnished me.

　　This testimonial I accordingly received in about a month, forwardeda copy of it to Mrs. Fairfax, and got that lady's reply, statingthat she was satisfied, and fixing that day fortnight as the periodfor my assuming the post of governess in her house.

　　I now busied myself in preparations: the fortnight passedrapidly. I had not a very large wardrobe, though it was adequate to mywants; and the last day sufficed to pack my trunk,- the same I hadbrought with me eight years ago from Gateshead.

　　The box was corded, the card nailed on. In half an hour the carrierwas to call for it to take it to Lowton, whither I myself was torepair at an early hour the next morning to meet the coach. I hadbrushed my black stuff travelling-dress, prepared my bonnet, gloves,and muff; sought in all my drawers to see that no article was leftbehind; and now having nothing more to do, I sat down and tried torest. I could not; though I had been on foot all day, I could notnow repose an instant; I was too much excited. A phase of my lifewas closing tonight, a new one opening to-morrow: impossible toslumber in the interval; I must watch feverishly while the changewas being accomplished.

　　'Miss,' said a servant who met me in the lobby, where I waswandering like a troubled spirit, 'a person below wishes to see you.'

　　'The carrier, no doubt,' I thought, and ran downstairs withoutinquiry. I was passing the back-parlour or teachers' sitting-room, thedoor of which was half open, to go to the kitchen, when some one ranout-

　　'It's her, I am sure!- I could have told her anywhere!' cried theindividual who stopped my progress and took my hand.

　　I looked: I saw a woman attired like a well-dressed servant,matronly, yet still young; very good-looking, with black hair andeyes, and lively complexion.

　　'Well, who is it?' she asked, in a voice and with a smile I halfrecognised; 'you've not quite forgotten me, I think, Miss Jane?'

　　In another second I was embracing and kissing her rapturously:'Bessie! Bessie! Bessie!' that was all I said; whereat she halflaughed, half cried, and we both went into the parlour. By the firestood a little fellow of three years old, in plaid frock and trousers.

　　'That is my little boy,' said Bessie directly.

　　'Then you are married, Bessie?'

　　'Yes; nearly five years since to Robert Leaven, the coachman; andI've a little girl besides Bobby there, that I've christened Jane.'

　　'And you don't live at Gateshead?'

　　'I live at the lodge: the old porter has left.'

　　'Well, and how do they all get on? Tell me everything about them,Bessie: but sit down first; and, Bobby, come and sit on my knee,will you?' but Bobby preferred sidling over to his mother.

　　'You're not grown so very tall, Miss Jane, nor so very stout,'continued Mrs. Leaven. 'I daresay they've not kept you too well atschool: Miss Reed is the head and shoulders taller than you are; andMiss Georgiana would make two of you in breadth.'

　　'Georgiana is handsome, I suppose, Bessie?'

　　'Very. She went up to London last winter with her mama, and thereeverybody admired her, and a young lord fell in love with her: but hisrelations were against the match; and- what do you think?- he and MissGeorgiana made it up to run away; but they were found out and stopped.It was Miss Reed that found them out: I believe she was envious; andnow she and her sister lead a cat and dog life together; they arealways quarrelling.'

　　'Well, and what of John Reed?'

　　'Oh, he is not doing so well as his mama could wish. He went tocollege, and he got- plucked, I think they call it: and then hisuncles wanted him to be a barrister, and study the law: but he is sucha dissipated young man, they will never make much of him, I think.'

　　'What does he look like?'

　　'He is very tall: some people call him a fine-looking young man;but he has such thick lips.'

　　'And Mrs. Reed?'

　　'Missis looks stout and well enough in the face, but I thinkshe's not quite easy in her mind: Mr. John's conduct does not pleaseher- he spends a deal of money.'

　　'Did she send you here, Bessie?'

　　'No, indeed: but I have long wanted to see you, and when I heardthat there had been a letter from you, and that you were going toanother part of the country, I thought I'd just set off, and get alook at you before you were quite out of my reach.'

　　'I am afraid you are disappointed in me, Bessie.' I said thislaughing: I perceived that Bessie's glance, though it expressedregard, did in no shape denote admiration.

　　'No, Miss Jane, not exactly: you are genteel enough; you looklike a lady, and it is as much as ever I expected of you: you wereno beauty as a child.'

　　I smiled at Bessie's frank answer: I felt that it was correct,but I confess I was not quite indifferent to its import: at eighteenmost people wish to please, and the conviction that they have not anexterior likely to second that desire brings anything butgratification.

　　'I daresay you are clever, though,' continued Bessie, by way ofsolace. 'What can you do? Can you play on the piano?'

　　'A little.'

　　There was one in the room; Bessie went and opened it, and thenasked me to sit down and give her a tune: I played a waltz or two, andshe was charmed.

　　'The Miss Reeds could not play as well!' said she exultingly. 'Ialways said you would surpass them in learning: and can you draw?'

　　'That is one of my paintings over the chimney-piece.' It was alandscape in water colours, of which I had made a present to thesuperintendent, in acknowledgment of her obliging mediation with thecommittee on my behalf, and which she had framed and glazed.

　　'Well, that is beautiful, Miss Jane! It is as fine a picture as anyMiss Reed's drawing-master could paint, let alone the young ladiesthemselves, who could not come near it: and have you learnt French?'

　　'Yes, Bessie, I can both read it and speak it.'

　　'And you can work on muslin and canvas?'

　　'I can.'

　　'Oh, you are quite a lady, Miss Jane! I knew you would be: you willget on whether your relations notice you or not. There was something Iwanted to ask you. Have you ever heard anything from your father'skinsfolk, the Eyres?'

　　'Never in my life.'

　　'Well, you know, Missis always said they were poor and quitedespicable: and they may be poor; but I believe they are as muchgentry as the Reeds are; for one day, nearly seven years ago, a Mr.Eyre came to Gateshead and wanted to see you; Missis said you wereat school fifty miles off; he seemed so much disappointed, for hecould not stay: he was going on a voyage to a foreign country, and theship was to sail from London in a day or two. He looked quite agentleman, and I believe he was your father's brother.'

　　'What foreign country was he going to, Bessie?'

　　'An island thousands of miles off, where they make wine- the butlerdid tell me-'

　　'Madeira?' I suggested.

　　'Yes, that is it- that is the very word.'

　　'So he went?'

　　'Yes; he did not stay many minutes in the house: Missis was veryhigh with him; she called him afterwards a "sneaking tradesman." MyRobert believes he was a wine-merchant.'

　　'Very likely,' I returned; 'or perhaps clerk or agent to awine-merchant.'

　　Bessie and I conversed about old times an hour longer, and then shewas obliged to leave me: I saw her again for a few minutes the nextmorning at Lowton, while I was waiting for the coach. We partedfinally at the door of the Brocklehurst Arms there, each went herseparate way; she set off for the brow of Lowood Fell to meet theconveyance which was to take her back to Gateshead, I mounted thevehicle which was to bear me to new duties and a new life in theunknown environs of Millcote.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER XI--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　A NEW chapter in a novel is something like a new scene in a play;and when I draw up the curtain this time, reader, you must fancy yousee a room in the George Inn at Millcote, with such large figuredpapering on the walls as inn rooms have; such a carpet, suchfurniture, such ornaments on the mantel-piece, such prints,including a portrait of George the Third, and another of the Prince ofWales, and a representation of the death of Wolfe. All this is visibleto you by the light of an oil lamp hanging from the ceiling, and bythat of an excellent fire, near which I sit in my cloak and bonnet; mymuff and umbrella lie on the table, and I am warming away the numbnessand chill contracted by sixteen hours' exposure to the rawness of anOctober day: I left Lowton at four o'clock A.M., and the Millcote townclock is now just striking eight.

　　Reader, though I look comfortably accommodated, I am not verytranquil in my mind. I thought when the coach stopped here there wouldbe some one to meet me; I looked anxiously round as I descended thewooden steps the 'boots' placed for my convenience, expecting tohear my name pronounced, and to see some description of carriagewaiting to convey me to Thornfield. Nothing of the sort was visible;and when I asked a waiter if any one had been to inquire after aMiss Eyre, I was answered in the negative: so I had no resource but torequest to be shown into a private room: and here I am waiting,while all sorts of doubts and fears are troubling my thoughts.

　　It is a very strange sensation to inexperienced youth to feelitself quite alone in the world, cut adrift from every connection,uncertain whether the port to which it is bound can be reached, andprevented by many impediments from returning to that it has quitted.The charm of adventure sweetens that sensation, the glow of pridewarms it; but then the throb of fear disturbs it; and fear with mebecame predominant when half an hour elapsed and still I was alone.I bethought myself to ring the bell.

　　'Is there a place in this neighbourhood called Thornfield?' I askedof the waiter who answered the summons.

　　'Thornfield? I don't know, ma'am; I'll inquire at the bar.' Hevanished, but reappeared instantly-

　　'Is your name Eyre, Miss?'

　　'Yes.'

　　'Person here waiting for you.'

　　I jumped up, took my muff and umbrella, and hastened into theinn-passage: a man was standing by the open door, and in thelamp-lit street I dimly saw a one-horse conveyance.

　　'This will be your luggage, I suppose?' said the man ratherabruptly when he saw me, pointing to my trunk in the passage.

　　'Yes.' He hoisted it on to the vehicle, which was a sort of car,and then I got in; before he shut me up, I asked him how far it was toThornfield.

　　'A matter of six miles.'

　　'How long shall we be before we get there?'

　　'Happen an hour and a half.'

　　He fastened the car door, climbed to his own seat outside, and weset off. Our progress was leisurely, and gave me ample time toreflect; I was content to be at length so near the end of myjourney; and as I leaned back in the comfortable though not elegantconveyance, I meditated much at my ease.

　　'I suppose,' thought I, 'judging from the plainness of theservant and carriage, Mrs. Fairfax is not a very dashing person: somuch the better; I never lived amongst fine people but once, and I wasvery miserable with them. I wonder if she lives alone except thislittle girl; if so, and if she is in any degree amiable, I shallsurely be able to get on with her; I will do my best; it is a pitythat doing one's best does not always answer. At Lowood, indeed, Itook that resolution, kept it, and succeeded in pleasing; but withMrs. Reed, I remember my best was always spurned with scorn. I prayGod Mrs. Fairfax may not turn out a second Mrs. Reed; but if she does,I am not bound to stay with her! let the worst come to the worst, Ican advertise again. How far are we on our road now, I wonder?'

　　I let down the window and looked out; Millcote was behind us;judging by the number of its lights, it seemed a place of considerablemagnitude, much larger than Lowton. We were now, as far as I couldsee, on a sort of common; but there were houses scattered all over thedistrict; I felt we were in a different region to Lowood, morepopulous, less picturesque; more stirring, less romantic.

　　The roads were heavy, the night misty; my conductor let his horsewalk all the way, and the hour and a half extended, I verilybelieve, to two hours; at last he turned in his seat and said-

　　'You're noan so far fro' Thornfield now.'

　　Again I looked out: we were passing a church; I saw its low broadtower against the sky, and its bell was tolling a quarter; I saw anarrow galaxy of lights too, on a hillside, marking a village orhamlet. About ten minutes after, the driver got down and opened a pairof gates: we passed through, and they clashed to behind us. We nowslowly ascended a drive, and came upon the long front of a house:candlelight gleamed from one curtained bow-window; all the rest weredark. The car stopped at the front door; it was opened by amaid-servant; I alighted and went in.

　　'Will you walk this way, ma'am?' said the girl; and I followedher across a square hall with high doors all round: she ushered meinto a room whose double illumination of fire and candle at firstdazzled me, contrasting as it did with the darkness to which my eyeshad been for two hours inured; when I could see, however, a cosy andagreeable picture presented itself to my view.

　　A snug small room; a round table by a cheerful fire; an arm-chairhigh-backed and old-fashioned, wherein sat the neatest imaginablelittle elderly lady, in widow's cap, black silk gown, and snowy muslinapron; exactly like what I had fancied Mrs. Fairfax, only less statelyand milder looking. She was occupied in knitting; a large cat satdemurely at her feet; nothing in short was wanting to complete thebeau-ideal of domestic comfort. A more reassuring introduction for anew governess could scarcely be conceived; there was no grandeur tooverwhelm, no stateliness to embarrass; and then, as I entered, theold lady got up and promptly and kindly came forward to meet me.

　　'How do you do, my dear? I am afraid you have had a tedious ride;John drives so slowly; you must be cold, come to the fire.'

　　'Mrs. Fairfax, I suppose?' said I.

　　'Yes, you are right: do sit down.'

　　She conducted me to her own chair, and then began to remove myshawl and untie my bonnet-strings; I begged she would not give herselfso much trouble.

　　'Oh, it is no trouble; I daresay your own hands are almost numbedwith cold. Leah, make a little hot negus and cut a sandwich or two:here are the keys of the storeroom.'

　　And she produced from her pocket a most housewifely bunch ofkeys, and delivered them to the servant.

　　'Now, then, draw nearer to the fire,' she continued. 'You'vebrought your luggage with you, haven't you, my dear?'

　　'Yes, ma'am.'

　　'I'll see it carried into your room,' she said, and bustled out.

　　'She treats me like a visitor,' thought I. 'I little expectedsuch a reception; I anticipated only coldness and stiffness: this isnot like what I have heard of the treatment of governesses; but I mustnot exult too soon.'

　　She returned; with her own hands cleared her knitting apparatus anda book or two from the table, to make room for the tray which Leah nowbrought, and then herself handed me the refreshments. I felt ratherconfused at being the object of more attention than I had everbefore received, and, that too, shown by my employer and superior; butas she did not herself seem to consider she was doing anything outof her place, I thought it better to take her civilities quietly.

　　'Shall I have the pleasure of seeing Miss Fairfax to-night?' Iasked, when I had partaken of what she offered me.

　　'What did you say, my dear? I am a little deaf,' returned thegood lady, approaching her ear to my mouth.

　　I repeated the question more distinctly.

　　'Miss Fairfax? Oh, you mean Miss Varens! Varens is the name of yourfuture pupil.'

　　'Indeed! Then she is not your daughter?'

　　'No,- I have no family.'

　　I should have followed up my first inquiry, by asking in what wayMiss Varens was connected with her; but I recollected it was notpolite to ask too many questions: besides, I was sure to hear in time.

　　'I am so glad,' she continued, as she sat down opposite to me,and took the cat on her knee; 'I am so glad you are come; it will bequite pleasant living here now with a companion. To be sure it ispleasant at any time; for Thornfield is a fine old hall, ratherneglected of late years perhaps, but still it is a respectableplace; yet you know in winter-time one feels dreary quite alone in thebest quarters. I say alone- Leah is a nice girl to be sure, and Johnand his wife are very decent people; but then you see they are onlyservants, and one can't converse with them on terms of equality: onemust keep them at due distance, for fear of losing one's authority.I'm sure last winter (it was a very severe one, if you recollect,and when it did not snow, it rained and blew), not a creature butthe butcher and postman came to the house, from November tillFebruary; and I really got quite melancholy with sitting night afternight alone; I had Leah in to read to me sometimes; but I don'tthink the poor girl liked the task much: she felt it confining. Inspring and summer one got on better: sunshine and long days makesuch a difference; and then, just at the commencement of thisautumn, little Adela Varens came and her nurse: a child makes ahouse alive all at once; and now you are here I shall be quite gay.'

　　My heart really warmed to the worthy lady as I heard her talk;and I drew my chair a little nearer to her, and expressed my sincerewish that she might find my company as agreeable as she anticipated.

　　'But I'll not keep you sitting up late to-night,' said she; 'itis on the stroke of twelve now, and you have been travelling allday: you must feel tired. If you have got your feet well warmed,I'll show you your bedroom. I've had the room next to mine preparedfor you; it is only a small apartment, but I thought you would like itbetter than one of the large front chambers: to be sure they havefiner furniture, but they are so dreary and solitary, I never sleep inthem myself.'

　　I thanked her for her considerate choice, and as I really feltfatigued with my long journey, expressed my readiness to retire. Shetook her candle, and I followed her from the room. First she went tosee if the hall-door was fastened; having taken the key from the lock,she led the way upstairs. The steps and banisters were of oak; thestaircase window was high and latticed; both it and the long galleryinto which the bedroom doors opened looked as if they belonged to achurch rather than a house. A very chill and vault-like air pervadedthe stairs and gallery, suggesting cheerless ideas of space andsolitude; and I was glad, when finally ushered into my chamber, tofind it of small dimensions, and furnished in ordinary, modern style.

　　When Mrs. Fairfax had bidden me a kind good-night, and I hadfastened my door, gazed leisurely round, and in some measure effacedthe eerie impression made by that wide hall, that dark and spaciousstaircase, and that long, cold gallery, by the livelier aspect of mylittle room, I remembered that, after a day of bodily fatigue andmental anxiety, I was now at last in safe haven. The impulse ofgratitude swelled my heart, and I knelt down at the bedside, andoffered up thanks where thanks were due; not forgetting, ere I rose,to implore aid on my further path, and the power of meriting thekindness which seemed so frankly offered me before it was earned. Mycouch had no thorns in it that night; my solitary room no fears. Atonce weary and content, I slept soon and soundly: when I awoke itwas broad day.

　　The chamber looked such a bright little place to me as the sunshone in between the gay blue chintz window curtains, showingpapered walls and a carpeted floor, so unlike the bare planks andstained plaster of Lowood, that my spirits rose at the view. Externalshave a great effect on the young: I thought that a fairer era oflife was beginning for me- one that was to have its flowers andpleasures, as well as its thorns and toils. My faculties, roused bythe change of scene, the new field offered to hope, seemed allastir. I cannot precisely define what they expected, but it wassomething pleasant: not perhaps that day or that month, but at anindefinite future period.

　　I rose; I dressed myself with care: obliged to be plain- for Ihad no article of attire that was not made with extreme simplicity-I was still by nature solicitous to be neat. It was not my habit to bedisregardful of appearance or careless of the impression I made: onthe contrary, I ever wished to look as well as I could, and toplease as much as my want of beauty would permit. I sometimesregretted that I was not handsomer; I sometimes wished to have rosycheeks, a straight nose, and small cherry mouth; I desired to be tall,stately, and finely developed in figure; I felt it a misfortune that Iwas so little, so pale, and had features so irregular and so marked.And why had I these aspirations and these regrets? It would bedifficult to say: I could not then distinctly say it to myself; yetI had a reason, and a logical, natural reason too. However, when I hadbrushed my hair very smooth, and put on my black frock- which,Quakerlike as it was, at least had the merit of fitting to a nicety-and adjusted my clean white tucker, I thought I should dorespectably enough to appear before Mrs. Fairfax, and that my newpupil would not at least recoil from me with antipathy. Havingopened my chamber window, and seen that I left all things straight andneat on the toilet table, I ventured forth.

　　Traversing the long and matted gallery, I descended the slipperysteps of oak; then I gained the hall: I halted there a minute; Ilooked at some pictures on the walls (one, I remember, represented agrim man in a cuirass, and one a lady with powdered hair and a pearlnecklace), at a bronze lamp pendent from the ceiling, at a great clockwhose case was of oak curiously carved, and ebon black with time andrubbing. Everything appeared very stately and imposing to me; but thenI was so little accustomed to grandeur. The hall-door, which washalf of glass, stood open; I stepped over the threshold. It was a fineautumn morning; the early sun shone serenely on embrowned groves andstill green fields; advancing on to the lawn, I looked up and surveyedthe front of the mansion. It was three storeys high, of proportionsnot vast, though considerable: a gentleman's manor-house, not anobleman's seat: battlements round the top gave it a picturesque look.Its grey front stood out well from the background of a rookery,whose cawing tenants were now on the wing: they flew over the lawn andgrounds to alight in a great meadow, from which these were separatedby a sunk fence, and where an array of mighty old thorn trees, strong,knotty, and broad as oaks, at once explained the etymology of themansion's designation. Farther off were hills: not so lofty as thoseround Lowood, nor so craggy, nor so like barriers of separation fromthe living world; but yet quiet and lonely hills enough, and seemingto embrace Thornfield with a seclusion I had not expected to findexistent so near the stirring locality of Millcote. A little hamlet,whose roofs were blent with trees, straggled up the side of one ofthese hills; the church of the district stood nearer Thornfield: itsold tower-top looked over a knoll between the house and gates.

　　I was yet enjoying the calm prospect and pleasant fresh air, yetlistening with delight to the cawing of the rooks, yet surveying thewide, hoary front of the hall, and thinking what a great place itwas for one lonely little dame like Mrs. Fairfax to inhabit, when thatlady appeared at the door.

　　'What! out already?' said she. 'I see you are an early riser.' Iwent up to her, and was received with an affable kiss and shake of thehand.

　　'How do you like Thornfield?' she asked. I told her I liked it verymuch.

　　'Yes,' she said, 'it is a pretty place; but I fear it will begetting out of order, unless Mr. Rochester should take it into hishead to come and reside here permanently; or, at least, visit itrather oftener: great houses and fine grounds require the presenceof the proprietor.'

　　'Mr. Rochester!' I exclaimed. 'Who is he?'

　　'The owner of Thornfield,' she responded quietly. 'Did you not knowhe was called Rochester?'

　　Of course I did not- I had never heard of him before; but the oldlady seemed to regard his existence as a universally understoodfact, with which everybody must be acquainted by instinct.

　　'I thought,' I continued, 'Thornfield belonged to you.'

　　'To me? Bless you, child; what an idea! To me! I am only thehousekeeper- the manager. To be sure I am distantly related to theRochesters by the mother's side, or at least my husband was; he wasa clergyman, incumbent of Hay- that little village yonder on the hill-and that church near the gates was his. The present Mr. Rochester'smother was a Fairfax, second cousin to my husband: but I never presumeon the connection- in fact, it is nothing to me; I consider myselfquite in the light of an ordinary housekeeper: my employer is alwayscivil, and I expect nothing more.'

　　'And the little girl- my pupil!'

　　'She is Mr. Rochester's ward; he commissioned me to find abelieve. Here she comes, with her "bonne," as she calls her nurse.'The enigma then was explained: this affable and kind little widowwas no great dame; but a dependant like myself. I did not like her theworse for that; on the contrary, I felt better pleased than ever.The equality between her and me was real; not the mere result ofcondescension on her part: so much the better- my position was all thefreer.

　　As I was meditating on this discovery, a little girl, followed byher attendant, came running up the lawn. I looked at my pupil, who didnot at first appear to notice me: she was quite a child, perhaps sevenor eight years old, slightly built, with a pale, small-featuredface, and a redundancy of hair falling in curls to her waist.

　　'Good morning, Miss Adela,' said Mrs. Fairfax. 'Come and speak tothe lady who is to teach you, and to make you a clever woman someday.' She approached.

　　'C'est la ma gouvernante!' said she, pointing to me, and addressingher nurse; who answered-

　　'Mais oui, certainement.'

　　'Are they foreigners?' I inquired, amazed at hearing the Frenchlanguage.

　　'The nurse is a foreigner, and Adela was born on the Continent;and, I believe, never left it till within six months ago. When shefirst came here she could speak no English; now she can make shiftto talk it a little: I don't understand her, she mixes it so withFrench; but you will make out her meaning very well, I daresay.'

　　Fortunately I had had the advantage of being taught French by aFrench lady; and as I had always made a point of conversing withMadame Pierrot as often as I could, and had besides, during the lastseven years, learnt a portion of French by heart daily- applyingmyself to take pains with my accent, and imitating as closely aspossible the pronunciation of my teacher, I had acquired a certaindegree of readiness and correctness in the language, and was notlikely to be much at a loss with Mademoiselle Adela. She came andshook hands with me when she heard that I was her governess; and asI led her in to breakfast, I addressed some phrases to her in herown tongue: she replied briefly at first, but after we were seatedat the table, and she had examined me some ten minutes with herlarge hazel eyes, she suddenly commenced chattering fluently.

　　'Ah!' cried she, in French, 'you speak my language as well as Mr.Rochester does: I can talk to you as I can to him, and so canSophie. She will be glad: nobody here understands her: MadameFairfax is all English. Sophie is my nurse; she came with me overthe sea in a great ship with a chimney that smoked- how it did smoke!-and I was sick, and so was Sophie, and so was Mr. Rochester. Mr.Rochester lay down on a sofa in a pretty room called the salon, andSophie and I had little beds in another place. I nearly fell out ofmine; it was like a shelf. And Mademoiselle- what is your name?'

　　'Eyre- Jane Eyre.'

　　'Aire? Bah! I cannot say it. Well, our ship stopped in the morning,before it was quite daylight, at a great city- a huge city, withvery dark houses and all smoky; not at all like the pretty cleantown I came from; and Mr. Rochester carried me in his arms over aplank to the land, and Sophie came after, and we all got into a coach,which took us to a beautiful large house, larger than this andfiner, called an hotel. We stayed there nearly a week: I and Sophieused to walk every day in a great green place full of trees, calledthe Park; and there were many children there besides me, and a pondwith beautiful birds in it, that I fed with crumbs.'

　　'Can you understand her when she runs on so fast?' asked Mrs.Fairfax.

　　I understood her very well, for I had been accustomed to the fluenttongue of Madame Pierrot.

　　'I wish,' continued the good lady, 'you would ask her a question ortwo about her parents: I wonder if she remembers them?'

　　'Adele,' I inquired, 'with whom did you live when you were inthat pretty clean town you spoke of?'

　　'I lived long ago with mama; but she is gone to the Holy Virgin.Mama used to teach me to dance and sing, and to say verses. A greatmany gentlemen and ladies came to see mama, and I used to dance beforethem, or to sit on their knees and sing to them: I liked it. Shall Ilet you hear me sing now?'

　　She had finished her breakfast, so I permitted her to give aspecimen of her accomplishments. Descending from her chair, she cameand placed herself on my knee; then, folding her little hands demurelybefore her, shaking back her curls and lifting her eyes to theceiling, she commenced singing a song from some opera. It was thestrain of a forsaken lady, who, after bewailing the perfidy of herlover, calls pride to her aid; desires her attendant to deck her inher brightest jewels and richest robes, and resolves to meet the falseone that night at a ball, and prove to him, by the gaiety of herdemeanour, how little his desertion has affected her.

　　The subject seemed strangely chosen for an infant singer; but Isuppose the point of the exhibition lay in hearing the notes of loveand jealousy warbled with the lisp of childhood; and in very bad tastethat point was: at least I thought so.

　　Adele sang the canzonette tunefully enough, and with the naivete ofher age. This achieved, she jumped from my knee and said, 'Now,Mademoiselle, I will repeat you some poetry.'

　　Assuming an attitude, she began 'La Ligue des Rats: fable de LaFontaine.' She then declaimed the little piece with an attention topunctuation and emphasis, a flexibility of voice and anappropriateness of gesture, very unusual indeed at her age, andwhich proved she had been carefully trained.

　　'Was it your mama who taught you that piece?' I asked.

　　'Yes, and she just used to say it in this way: "Qu'avez vousdonc? lui dit un de ces rats; parlez!" She made me lift my hand- so-to remind me to raise my voice at the question. Now shall I dancefor you?'

　　'No, that will do: but after your mama went to the Holy Virgin,as you say, with whom did you live then?'

　　'With Madame Frederic and her husband: she took care of me, but sheis nothing related to me. I think she is poor, for she had not so finea house as mama. I was not long there. Mr. Rochester asked me if Iwould like to go and live with him in England, and I said yes; for Iknew Mr. Rochester before I knew Madame Frederic, and he was alwayskind to me and gave me pretty dresses and toys: but you see he has notkept his word, for he has brought me to England, and now he is goneback again himself, and I never see him.'

　　After breakfast, Adele and I withdrew to the library, which room,it appears, Mr. Rochester had directed should be used as theschoolroom. Most of the books were locked up behind glass doors; butthere was one bookcase left open containing everything that could beneeded in the way of elementary works, and several volumes of lightliterature, poetry, biography, travels, a few romances, etc. I supposehe had considered that these were all the governess would requirefor her private perusal; and, indeed, they contented me amply forthe present; compared with the scanty pickings I had now and then beenable to glean at Lowood, they seemed to offer an abundant harvest ofentertainment and information. In this room, too, there was acabinet piano, quite new and of superior tone; also an easel forpainting and a pair of globes.

　　I found my pupil sufficiently docile, though disinclined toapply: she had not been used to regular occupation of any kind. I feltit would be injudicious to confine her too much at first; so, when Ihad talked to her a great deal, and got her to learn a little, andwhen the morning had advanced to noon, I allowed her to return toher nurse. I then proposed to occupy myself till dinner-time indrawing some little sketches for her use.

　　As I was going upstairs to fetch my portfolio and pencils, Mrs.Fairfax called to me: 'Your morning school-hours are over now, Isuppose,' said she. She was in a room the folding doors of which stoodopen: I went in when she addressed me. It was a large, statelyapartment, with purple chairs and curtains, a Turkey carpet,walnut-panelled walls, one vast window rich in stained glass, and alofty ceiling, nobly moulded. Mrs. Fairfax was dusting some vases offine purple spar, which stood on a sideboard.

　　'What a beautiful room!' I exclaimed, as I looked round; for Ihad never before seen any half so imposing.

　　'Yes; this is the dining-room. I have just opened the window, tolet in a little air and sunshine; for everything gets so damp inapartments that are seldom inhabited; the drawing-room yonder feelslike a vault.'

　　She pointed to a wide arch corresponding to the window, and hunglike it with a Tyrian-dyed curtain, now looped up. Mounting to it bytwo broad steps, and looking through, I thought I caught a glimpseof a fairy place, so bright to my novice-eyes appeared the viewbeyond. Yet it was merely a very pretty drawing-room, and within ita boudoir, both spread with white carpets, on which seemed laidbrilliant garlands of flowers; both ceiled with snowy mouldings ofwhite grapes and vine-leaves, beneath which glowed in rich contrastcrimson couches and ottomans; while the ornaments on the pale Parianmantelpiece were of sparkling Bohemian glass, ruby red; and betweenthe windows large mirrors repeated the general blending of snow andfire.

　　'In what order you keep these rooms, Mrs. Fairfax!' said I. 'Nodust, no canvas coverings: except that the air feels chilly, one wouldthink they were inhabited daily.'

　　'Why, Miss Eyre, though Mr. Rochester's visits here are rare,they are always sudden and unexpected; and as I observed that it puthim out to find everything swathed up, and to have a bustle ofarrangement on his arrival, I thought it best to keep the rooms inreadiness.'

　　'Is Mr. Rochester an exacting, fastidious sort of man?'

　　'Not particularly so; but he has a gentleman's tastes and habits,and he expects to have things managed in conformity to them.'

　　'Do you like him? Is he generally liked?'

　　'Oh, yes; the family have always been respected here. Almost allthe land in this neighbourhood, as far as you can see, has belonged tothe Rochesters time out of mind.'

　　'Well, but, leaving his land out of the question, do you likehim? Is he liked for himself?'

　　'I have no cause to do otherwise than like him; and I believe he isconsidered a just and liberal landlord by his tenants: but he hasnever lived much amongst them.'

　　'But has he no peculiarities? What, in short, is his character?'

　　'Oh! his character is unimpeachable, I suppose. He is ratherpeculiar, perhaps: he has travelled a great deal, and seen a greatdeal of the world, I should think. I daresay he is clever, but I neverhad much conversation with him.'

　　'In what way is he peculiar?'

　　'I don't know- it is not easy to describe- nothing striking, butyou feel it when he speaks to you; you cannot be always sure whetherhe is in jest or earnest, whether he is pleased or the contrary; youdon't thoroughly understand him, in short- at least, I don't: but itis of no consequence, he is a very good master.'

　　This was all the account I got from Mrs. Fairfax of her employerand mine. There are people who seem to have no notion of sketching acharacter, or observing and describing salient points, either inpersons or things: the good lady evidently belonged to this class;my queries puzzled, but did not draw her out. Mr. Rochester was Mr.Rochester in her eyes; a gentleman, a landed proprietor- nothing more:she inquired and searched no further, and evidently wondered at mywish to gain a more definite notion of his identity.

　　When we left the dining-room she proposed to show me over therest of the house; and I followed her upstairs and downstairs,admiring as I went; for all was well arranged and handsome. Thelarge front chambers I thought especially grand: and some of thethird-storey rooms, though dark and low, were interesting from theirair of antiquity. The furniture once appropriated to the lowerapartments had from time to time been removed here, as fashionschanged: and the imperfect light entering by their narrow casementshowed bed-steads of a hundred years old; chests in oak or walnut,looking, with their strange carvings of palm branches and cherubs'heads, like types of the Hebrew ark; rows of venerable chairs,high-backed and narrow; stools still more antiquated, on whosecushioned tops were yet apparent traces of half-effacedembroideries, wrought by fingers that for two generations had beencoffin-dust. All these relics gave to the third storey of ThornfieldHall the aspect of a home of the past: a shrine of memory. I liked thehush, the gloom, the quaintness of these retreats in the day; but I byno means coveted a night's repose on one of those wide and heavy beds:shut in, some of them, with doors of oak; shaded, others, with wroughtold English hangings crusted with thick work, portraying effigies ofstrange flowers, and stranger birds, and strangest human beings,-all which would have looked strange, indeed, by the pallid gleam ofmoonlight.

　　'Do the servants sleep in these rooms?' I asked.

　　'No; they occupy a range of smaller apartments to the back; noone ever sleeps here: one would almost say that, if there were a ghostat Thornfield Hall, this would be its haunt.'

　　'So I think: you have no ghost, then?'

　　'None that I ever heard of,' returned Mrs. Fairfax, smiling.

　　'Nor any traditions of one? no legends or ghost stories?'

　　'I believe not. And yet it is said the Rochesters have beenrather a violent than a quiet race in their time: perhaps, though,that is the reason they rest tranquilly in their graves now.'

　　'Yes- "after life's fitful fever they sleep well,"' I muttered.'Where are you going now, Mrs. Fairfax?' for she was moving away.

　　'On to the leads; will you come and see the view from thence?' Ifollowed still, up a very narrow staircase to the attics, and thenceby a ladder and through a trap-door to the roof of the hall. I was nowon a level with the crow colony, and could see into their nests.Leaning over the battlements and looking far down, I surveyed thegrounds laid out like a map: the bright and velvet lawn closelygirdling the grey base of the mansion; the field, wide as a park,dotted with its ancient timber; the wood, dun and sere, divided by apath visibly overgrown, greener with moss than the trees were withfoliage; the church at the gates, the road, the tranquil hills, allreposing in the autumn day's sun; the horizon bounded by apropitious sky, azure, marbled with pearly white. No feature in thescene was extraordinary, but all was pleasing. When I turned from itand repassed the trap-door, I could scarcely see my way down theladder; the attic seemed black as a vault compared with that arch ofblue air to which I had been looking up, and to that sunlit scene ofgrove, pasture, and green hill, of which the hall was the centre,and over which I had been gazing with delight.

　　Mrs. Fairfax stayed behind a moment to fasten the trap-door; I,by dint of groping, found the outlet from the attic, and proceededto descend the narrow garret staircase. I lingered in the long passageto which this led, separating the front and back rooms of the thirdstorey: narrow, low, and dim, with only one little window at the farend, and looking, with its two rows of small black doors all shut,like a corridor in some Bluebeard's castle.

　　While I paced softly on, the last sound I expected to hear in sostill a region, a laugh, struck my ear. It was a curious laugh;distinct, formal, mirthless. I stopped: the sound ceased, only foran instant; it began again, louder: for at first, though distinct,it was very low. It passed off in a clamorous peal that seemed to wakean echo in every lonely chamber; though it originated but in one,and I could have pointed out the door whence the accents issued.

　　'Mrs. Fairfax!' I called out: for I now heard her descending thegreat stairs. 'Did you hear that loud laugh? Who is it?'

　　'Some of the servants, very likely,' she answered: 'perhaps GracePoole.'

　　'Did you hear it?' I again inquired.

　　'Yes, plainly: I often hear her: she sews in one of these rooms.Sometimes Leah is with her; they are frequently noisy together.'

　　The laugh was repeated in its low, syllabic tone, and terminated inan odd murmur.

　　'Grace!' exclaimed Mrs. Fairfax.

　　I really did not expect any Grace to answer; for the laugh was astragic, as preternatural a laugh as any I ever heard; and, but that itwas high noon, and that no circumstance of ghostliness accompanied thecurious cachinnation; but that neither scene nor season favoured fear,I should have been superstitiously afraid. However, the event showedme I was a fool for entertaining a sense even of surprise.

　　The door nearest me opened, and a servant came out,- a woman ofbetween thirty and forty; a set, square-made figure, red-haired, andwith a hard, plain face: any apparition less romantic or lessghostly could scarcely be conceived.

　　'Too much noise, Grace,' said Mrs. Fairfax. 'Rememberdirections!' Grace curtseyed silently and went in.

　　'She is a person we have to sew and assist Leah in herhousemaid's work,' continued the widow; 'not altogetherunobjectionable in some points, but she does well enough. By thebye, how have you got on with your new pupil this morning?'

　　The conversation, thus turned on Adele, continued till we reachedthe light and cheerful region below. Adele came running to meet usin the hall, exclaiming-

　　'Mesdames, vous etes servies!' adding, 'J'ai bien faim, moi!'

　　We found dinner ready, and waiting for us in Mrs. Fairfax's room.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER XII

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　THE promise of a smooth career, which my first calm introduction toThornfield Hall seemed to pledge, was not belied on a longeracquaintance with the place and its inmates. Mrs. Fairfax turned outto be what she appeared, a placid-tempered, kind-natured woman, ofcompetent education and average intelligence. My pupil was a livelychild, who had been spoilt and indulged, and therefore was sometimeswayward; but as she was committed entirely to my care, and noinjudicious interference from any quarter ever thwarted my plans forher improvement, she soon forgot her little freaks, and becameobedient and teachable. She had no great talents, no marked traitsof character, no peculiar development of feeling or taste which raisedher one inch above the ordinary level of childhood; but neither hadshe any deficiency or vice which sunk her below it. She madereasonable progress, entertained for me a vivacious, though perhapsnot very profound, affection; and by her simplicity, gay prattle,and efforts to please, inspired me, in return, with a degree ofattachment sufficient to make us both content in each other's society.

　　This, par parenthese, will be thought cool language by personswho entertain solemn doctrines about the angelic nature of children,and the duty of those charged with their education to conceive forthem an idolatrous devotion: but I am not writing to flatterparental egotism, to echo cant, or prop up humbug; I am merely tellingthe truth. I felt a conscientious solicitude for Adele's welfare andprogress, and a quiet liking for her little self: just as Icherished towards Mrs. Fairfax a thankfulness for her kindness, anda pleasure in her society proportionate to the tranquil regard she hadfor me, and the moderation of her mind and character.

　　Anybody may blame me who likes, when I add further, that, now andthen, when I took a walk by myself in the grounds; when I went down tothe gates and looked through them along the road; or when, while Adeleplayed with her nurse, and Mrs. Fairfax made jellies in the storeroom,I climbed the three staircases, raised the trap-door of the attic, andhaving reached the leads, looked out afar over sequestered field andhill, and along dim sky-line- that then I longed for a power of visionwhich might overpass that limit; which might reach the busy world,towns, regions full of life I had heard of but never seen- that then Idesired more of practical experience than I possessed; more ofintercourse with my kind, of acquaintance with variety of character,than was here within my reach. I valued what was good in Mrs. Fairfax,and what was good in Adele; but I believed in the existence of otherand more vivid kinds of goodness, and what I believed in I wished tobehold.

　　Who blames me? Many, no doubt; and I shall be calleddiscontented. I could not help it: the restlessness was in mynature; it agitated me to pain sometimes. Then my sole relief was towalk along the corridor of the third storey, backwards and forwards,safe in the silence and solitude of the spot, and allow my mind'seye to dwell on whatever bright visions rose before it- and,certainly, they were many and glowing; to let my heart be heaved bythe exultant movement, which, while it swelled it in trouble, expandedit with life; and, best of all, to open my inward ear to a tale thatwas never ended- a tale my imagination created, and narratedcontinuously; quickened with all of incident, life, fire, feeling,that I desired and had not in my actual existence.

　　It is in vain to say human beings ought to be satisfied withtranquillity: they must have action; and they will make it if theycannot find it. Millions are condemned to a stiller doom than mine,and millions are in silent revolt against their lot. Nobody knowshow many rebellions besides political rebellions ferment in the massesof life which people earth. Women are supposed to be very calmgenerally: but women feel just as men feel; they need exercise fortheir faculties, and a field for their efforts, as much as theirbrothers do; they suffer from too rigid a restraint, too absolute astagnation, precisely as men would suffer; and it is narrow-mindedin their more privileged fellow-creatures to say that they ought toconfine themselves to making puddings and knitting stockings, toplaying on the piano and embroidering bags. It is thoughtless tocondemn them, or laugh at them, if they seek to do more or learnmore than custom has pronounced necessary for their sex.

　　When thus alone, I not unfrequently heard Grace Poole's laugh:the same peal, the same low, slow ha! ha! which, when first heard, hadthrilled me: I heard, too, her eccentric murmurs; stranger than herlaugh. There were days when she was quite silent; but there wereothers when I could not account for the sounds she made. Sometimes Isaw her: she would come out of her room with a basin, or a plate, or atray in her hand, go down to the kitchen and shortly return, generally(oh, romantic reader, forgive me for telling the plain truth!) bearinga pot of porter. Her appearance always acted as a damper to thecuriosity raised by her oral oddities: hard-featured and staid, shehad no point to which interest could attach. I made some attempts todraw her into conversation, but she seemed a person of few words: amonosyllabic reply usually cut short every effort of that sort.

　　The other members of the household, viz., John and his wife, Leahthe housemaid, and Sophie the French nurse, were decent people; but inno respect remarkable; with Sophie I used to talk French, andsometimes I asked her questions about her native country; but shewas not of a descriptive or narrative turn, and generally gave suchvapid and confused answers as were calculated rather to check thanencourage inquiry.

　　October, November, December passed away. One afternoon inJanuary, Mrs. Fairfax had begged a holiday for Adele, because shehad a cold; and, as Adele seconded the request with an ardour thatreminded me how precious occasional holidays had been to me in myown childhood, I accorded it, deeming that I did well in showingpliability on the point. It was a fine, calm day, though very cold;I was tired of sitting still in the library through a whole longmorning: Mrs. Fairfax had just written a letter which was waiting tobe posted, so I put on my bonnet and cloak and volunteered to carry itto Hay; the distance, two miles, would be a pleasant winterafternoon walk. Having seen Adele comfortably seated in her littlechair by Mrs. Fairfax's parlour fireside, and given her her best waxdoll (which I usually kept enveloped in silver paper in a drawer) toplay with, and a story-book for a change of amusement; and havingreplied to her 'Revenez bientot, ma bonne amie, ma chere Mdlle.Jeannette,' with a kiss I set out.

　　The ground was hard, the air was still, my road was lonely; Iwalked fast till I got warm, and then I walked slowly to enjoy andanalyse the species of pleasure brooding for me in the hour andsituation. It was three o'clock; the church bell tolled as I passedunder the belfry: the charm of the hour lay in its approachingdimness, in the low-gliding and pale-beaming sun. I was a mile fromThornfield, in a lane noted for wild roses in summer, for nuts andblackberries in autumn, and even now possessing a few coraltreasures in hips and haws, but whose best winter delight lay in itsutter solitude and leafless repose. If a breath of air stirred, itmade no sound here; for there was not a holly, not an evergreen torustle, and the stripped hawthorn and hazel bushes were as still asthe white, worn stones which causewayed the middle of the path. Farand wide, on each side, there were only fields, where no cattle nowbrowsed; and the little brown birds, which stirred occasionally in thehedge, looked like single russet leaves that had forgotten to drop.

　　This lane inclined up-hill all the way to Hay; having reached themiddle, I sat down on a stile which led thence into a field. Gatheringmy mantle about me, and sheltering my hands in my muff, I did not feelthe cold, though it froze keenly; as was attested by a sheet of icecovering the causeway, where a little brooklet, now congealed, hadoverflowed after a rapid thaw some days since. From my seat I couldlook down on Thornfield: the grey and battlemented hall was theprincipal object in the vale below me; its woods and dark rookery roseagainst the, west. I lingered till the sun went down amongst thetrees, and sank crimson and clear behind them. I then turned eastward.

　　On the hill-top above me sat the rising moon; pale yet as acloud, but brightening momentarily, she looked over Hay, which, halflost in trees, sent up a blue smoke from its few chimneys: it wasyet a mile distant, but in the absolute hush I could hear plainlyits thin murmurs of life. My ear, too, felt the flow of currents; inwhat dales and depths I could not tell: but there were many hillsbeyond Hay, and doubtless many becks threading their passes. Thatevening calm betrayed alike the tinkle of the nearest streams, thesough of the most remote.

　　A rude noise broke on these fine ripplings and whisperings, at onceso far away and so clear: a positive tramp, tramp, a metallic clatter,which effaced the soft wave-wanderings; as, in a picture, the solidmass of a crag, or the rough boles of a great oak, drawn in dark andstrong on the foreground, efface the aerial distance of azure hill,sunny horizon, and blended clouds where tint melts into tint.

　　The din was on the causeway: a horse was coming; the windings ofthe lane yet hid it, but it approached. I was just leaving thestile; yet, as the path was narrow, I sat still to let it go by. Inthose days I was young, and all sorts of fancies bright and darktenanted my mind: the memories of nursery stories were there amongstother rubbish; and when they recurred, maturing youth added to thema vigour and vividness beyond what childhood could give. As this horseapproached, and as I watched for it to appear through the dusk, Iremembered certain of Bessie's tales, wherein figured aNorth-of-England spirit called a 'Gytrash,' which, in the form ofhorse, mule, or large dog, haunted solitary ways, and sometimes cameupon belated travellers, as this horse was now coming upon me.

　　It was very near, but not yet in sight; when, in addition to thetramp, tramp, I heard a rush under the hedge, and close down by thehazel stems glided a great dog, whose black and white colour madehim a distinct object against the trees. It was exactly one form ofBessie's Gytrash- a lion-like creature with long hair and a huge head:it passed me, however, quietly enough; not staying to look up, withstrange pretercanine eyes, in my face, as I half expected it would.The horse followed,- a tall steed, and on its back a rider. The man,the human being, broke the spell at once. Nothing ever rode theGytrash: it was always alone; and goblins, to my notions, thoughthey might tenant the dumb carcasses of beasts, could scarce covetshelter in the commonplace human form. No Gytrash was this,- only atraveller taking the short cut to Millcote. He passed, and I wenton; a few steps, and I turned: a sliding sound and an exclamation of'What the deuce is to do now?' and a clattering tumble, arrested myattention. Man and horse were down; they had slipped on the sheet ofice which glazed the causeway. The dog came bounding back, andseeing his master in a predicament, and hearing the horse groan,barked till the evening hills echoed the sound, which was deep inproportion to his magnitude. He snuffed round the prostrate group, andthen he ran up to me; it was all he could do,- there was no other helpat hand to summon. I obeyed him, and walked down to the traveller,by this time struggling himself free of his steed. His efforts were sovigorous, I thought he could not be much hurt; but I asked him thequestion-

　　'Are you injured, sir?'

　　I think he was swearing, but am not certain; however, he waspronouncing some formula which prevented him from replying to medirectly.

　　'Can I do anything?' I asked again.

　　'You must just stand on one side,' he answered as he rose, first tohis knees, and then to his feet. I did; whereupon began a heaving,stamping, clattering process, accompanied by a barking and bayingwhich removed me effectually some yards' distance; but I would notbe driven quite away till I saw the event. This was finally fortunate;the horse was re-established, and the dog was silenced with a 'Down,Pilot!' The traveller now, stooping, felt his foot and leg, as iftrying whether they were sound; apparently something ailed them, forhe halted to the stile whence I had just risen, and sat down.

　　I was in the mood for being useful, or at least officious, I think,for I now drew near him again.

　　'If you are hurt, and want help, sir, I can fetch some one eitherfrom Thornfield Hall or from Hay.'

　　'Thank you: I shall do: I have no broken bones,- only a sprain;'and again he stood up and tried his foot, but the result extorted aninvoluntary 'Ugh!'

　　Something of daylight still lingered, and the moon was waxingbright: I could see him plainly. His figure was enveloped in ariding cloak, fur collared and steel clasped; its details were notapparent, but I traced the general points of middle height andconsiderable breadth of chest. He had a dark face, with stern featuresand a heavy brow; his eyes and gathered eyebrows looked ireful andthwarted just now; he was past youth, but had not reachedmiddle-age; perhaps he might be thirty-five. I felt no fear of him,and but little shyness. Had he been a handsome, heroic-looking younggentleman, I should not have dared to stand thus questioning himagainst his will, and offering my services unasked. I had hardlyever seen a handsome youth; never in my life spoken to one. I had atheoretical reverence and homage for beauty, elegance, gallantry,fascination; but had I met those qualities incarnate in masculineshape, I should have known instinctively that they neither had norcould have sympathy with anything in me, and should have shunnedthem as one would fire, lightning, or anything else that is bright butantipathetic.

　　If even this stranger had smiled and been good-humoured to mewhen I addressed him; if he had put off my offer of assistance gailyand with thanks, I should have gone on my way and not felt anyvocation to renew inquiries: but the frown, the roughness of thetraveller, set me at my ease: I retained my station when he waved tome to go, and announced-

　　'I cannot think of leaving you, sir, at so late an hour, in thissolitary lane, till I see you are fit to mount your horse.'

　　He looked at me when I said this; he had hardly turned his eyesin my direction before.

　　'I should think you ought to be at home yourself,' said he, 'if youhave a home in this neighbourhood: where do you come from?'

　　'From just below; and I am not at all afraid of being out late whenit is moonlight: I will run over to Hay for you with pleasure, ifyou wish it: indeed, I am going there to post a letter.'

　　'You live just below- do you mean at that house with thebattlements?' pointing to Thornfield Hall, on which the moon cast ahoary gleam, bringing it out distinct and pale from the woods, that,by contrast with the western sky, now seemed one mass of shadow.

　　'Yes, sir.'

　　'Whose house is it?'

　　'Mr. Rochester's.'

　　'Do you know Mr. Rochester?'

　　'No, I have never seen him.'

　　'He is not resident, then?'

　　'No.'

　　'Can you tell me where he is?'

　　'I cannot.'

　　'You are not a servant at the hall, of course. You are-' Hestopped, ran his eye over my dress, which, as usual, was quite simple:a black merino cloak, a black beaver bonnet; neither of them half fineenough for a lady's-maid. He seemed puzzled to decide what I was; Ihelped him.

　　'I am the governess.'

　　'Ah, the governess!' he repeated; 'deuce take me, if I had notforgotten! The governess!' and again my raiment underwent scrutiny. Intwo minutes he rose from the stile: his face expressed pain when hetried to move.

　　'I cannot commission you to fetch help,' he said; 'but you may helpme a little yourself, if you will be so kind.'

　　'Yes, sir.'

　　'You have not an umbrella that I can use as a stick?'

　　'No.'

　　'Try to get hold of my horse's bridle and lead him to me: you arenot afraid?'

　　I should have been afraid to touch a horse when alone, but whentold to do it, I was disposed to obey. I put down my muff on thestile, and went up to the tall steed; I endeavoured to catch thebridle, but it was a spirited thing, and would not let me come nearits head; I made effort on effort, though in vain: meantime, I wasmortally afraid of its trampling forefeet. The traveller waited andwatched for some time, and at last he laughed.

　　'I see,' he said, 'the mountain will never be brought to Mahomet,so all you can do is to aid Mahomet to go to the mountain; I mustbeg of you to come here.'

　　I came. 'Excuse me,' he continued: 'necessity compels me to makeyou useful.' He laid a heavy hand on my shoulder, and leaning on mewith some stress, limped to his horse. Having once caught thebridle, he mastered it directly and sprang to his saddle; grimacinggrimly as he made the effort, for it wrenched his sprain.

　　'Now,' said he, releasing his under lip from a hard bite, 'justhand me my whip; it lies there under the hedge.'

　　I sought it and found it.

　　'Thank you; now make haste with the letter to Hay, and return asfast as you can.'

　　A touch of a spurred heel made his horse first start and rear,and then bound away; the dog rushed in his traces; all three vanished,

　　'Like heath that, in the wilderness,

　　The wild wind whirls away.'

　　I took up my muff and walked on. The incident had occurred andwas gone for me: it was an incident of no moment, no romance, nointerest in a sense; yet it marked with change one single hour of amonotonous life. My help had been needed and claimed; I had givenit: I was pleased to have done something; trivial, transitory thoughthe deed was, it was yet an active thing, and I was weary of anexistence all passive. The new face, too, was like a new pictureintroduced to the gallery of memory; and it was dissimilar to allthe others hanging there: firstly, because it was masculine; and,secondly, because it was dark, strong, and stern. I had it stillbefore me when I entered Hay, and slipped the letter into thepost-office; I saw it as I walked fast down-hill all the way home.When I came to the stile, I stopped a minute, looked round andlistened, with an idea that a horse's hoofs might ring on the causewayagain, and that a rider in a cloak, and a Gytrash-like Newfoundlanddog, might be again apparent: I saw only the hedge and a pollardwillow before me, rising up still and straight to meet themoonbeams; I heard only the faintest waft of wind roaming fitful amongthe trees round Thornfield, a mile distant; and when I glanced down inthe direction of the murmur, my eye, traversing the hall-front, caughta light kindling in a window: it reminded me that I was late, and Ihurried on.

　　I did not like re-entering Thornfield. To pass its threshold was toreturn to stagnation; to cross the silent hall, to ascend the darksomestaircase, to seek my own lonely little room, and then to meettranquil Mrs. Fairfax, and spend the long winter evening with her, andher only, was to quell wholly the faint excitement wakened by mywalk,- to slip again over my faculties the viewless fetters of anuniform and too still existence; of an existence whose very privilegesof security and ease I was becoming incapable of appreciating. Whatgood it would have done me at that time to have been tossed in thestorms of an uncertain struggling life, and to have been taught byrough and bitter experience to long for the calm amidst which I nowrepined! Yes, just as much good as it would do a man tired ofsitting still in a 'too easy chair' to take a long walk: and just asnatural was the wish to stir, under my circumstances, as it would beunder his.

　　I lingered at the gates; I lingered on the lawn; I pacedbackwards and forwards on the pavement; the shutters of the glass doorwere closed; I could not see into the interior; and both my eyes andspirit seemed drawn from the gloomy house- from the grey hollow filledwith rayless cells, as it appeared to me- to that sky expandedbefore me,- a blue sea absolved from taint of cloud; the moonascending it in solemn march; her orb seeming to look up as she leftthe hill-tops, from behind which she had come, far and farther belowher, and aspired to the zenith, midnight dark in its fathomlessdepth and measureless distance; and for those trembling stars thatfollowed her course; they made my heart tremble, my veins glow whenI viewed them. Little things recall us to earth; the clock struck inthe hall; that sufficed; I turned from moon and stars, opened aside-door, and went in.

　　The hall was not dark, nor yet was it lit, only by the high-hungbronze lamp; a warm glow suffused both it and the lower steps of theoak staircase. This ruddy shine issued from the great dining-room,whose two-leaved door stood open, and showed a genial fire in thegrate, glancing on marble hearth and brass fire-irons, and revealingpurple draperies and polished furniture, in the most pleasantradiance. It revealed, too, a group near the mantelpiece: I hadscarcely caught it, and scarcely become aware of a cheerful minglingof voices, amongst which I seemed to distinguish the tones of Adele,when the door closed.

　　I hastened to Mrs. Fairfax's room; there was a fire there too,but no candle, and no Mrs. Fairfax. Instead, all alone, sittingupright on the rug, and gazing with gravity at the blaze, I beheld agreat black and white long-haired dog, just like the Gytrash of thelane. It was so like it that I went forward and said- 'Pilot,' and thething got up and came to me and snuffed me. I caressed him, and hewagged his great tail; but he looked an eerie creature to be alonewith, and I could not tell whence he had come. I rang the bell, forI wanted a candle; and I wanted, too, to get an account of thisvisitant. Leah entered.

　　'What dog is this?'

　　'He came with master.'

　　'With whom?'

　　'With master- Mr. Rochester- he is just arrived.'

　　'Indeed! and is Mrs. Fairfax with him?'

　　'Yes, and Miss Adele; they are in the dining-room, and John is gonefor a surgeon; for master has had an accident; his horse fell andhis ankle is sprained.'

　　'Did the horse fall in Hay Lane?'

　　'Yes, coming down-hill; it slipped on some ice.'

　　'Ah! Bring me a candle, will you, Leah?'

　　Leah brought it; she entered, followed by Mrs. Fairfax, whorepeated the news; adding that Mr. Carter the surgeon was come, andwas now with Mr. Rochester: then she hurried out to give ordersabout tea, and I went upstairs to take off my things.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER XIII

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　MR. ROCHESTER, it seems, by the surgeon's orders, went to bed earlythat night; nor did he rise soon next morning. When he did comedown, it was to attend to business: his agent and some of histenants were arrived, and waiting to speak with him.

　　Adele and I had now to vacate the library: it would be in dailyrequisition as a reception-room for callers. A fire was lit in anapartment upstairs, and there I carried our books, and arranged it forthe future schoolroom. I discerned in the course of the morning thatThornfield Hall was a changed place: no longer silent as a church,it echoed every hour or two to a knock at the door, or a clang ofthe bell: steps, too, often traversed the hall, and new voices spokein different keys below; a rill from the outer world was flowingthrough it; it had a master: for my part, I liked it better.

　　Adele was not easy to teach that day; she could not apply: she keptrunning to the door and looking over the banisters to see if she couldget a glimpse of Mr. Rochester; then she coined pretexts to godownstairs, in order, as I shrewdly suspected, to visit the library,where I knew she was not wanted; then, when I got a little angry,and made her sit still, she continued to talk incessantly of her 'ami,Monsieur Edouard Fairfax de Rochester,' as she dubbed him (I had notbefore heard his prenomens), and to conjecture what presents he hadbrought her: for it appears he had intimated the night before, thatwhen his luggage came from Millcote, there would be found amongst it alittle box in whose contents she had an interest.

　　'Et cela doit signifier,' said she, 'qu'il y aura la dedans uncadeau pour moi, et peut-etre pour vous aussi, mademoiselle.Monsieur a parle de vous: il m'a demande le nom de ma gouvernante,et si elle n'etait pas une petite personne, assez mince et un peupale. J'ai dit qu'oui: car c'est vrai, n'est-ce pas, mademoiselle?'

　　I and my pupil dined as usual in Mrs. Fairfax's parlour; theafternoon was wild and snowy, and we passed it in the schoolroom. Atdark I allowed Adele to put away books and work, and to rundownstairs; for, from the comparative silence below, and from thecessation of appeals to the door-bell, I conjectured that Mr.Rochester was now at liberty. Left alone, I walked to the window;but nothing was to be seen thence: twilight and snowflakes togetherthickened the air, and hid the very shrubs on the lawn. I let down thecurtain and went back to the fireside.

　　In the clear embers I was tracing a view, not unlike a picture Iremembered to have seen of the castle of Heidelberg, on the Rhine,when Mrs. Fairfax came in, breaking up by her entrance the fierymosaic I had been piecing together, and scattering too some heavyunwelcome thoughts that were beginning to throng on my solitude.

　　'Mr. Rochester would be glad if you and your pupil would take teawith him in the drawing-room this evening,' said she: 'he has beenso much engaged all day that he could not ask to see you before.'

　　'When is his tea-time?' I inquired.

　　'Oh, at six o'clock: he keeps early hours in the country. You hadbetter change your frock now; I will go with you and fasten it. Hereis a candle.'

　　'Is it necessary to change my frock?'

　　'Yes, you had better: I always dress for the evening when Mr.Rochester is here.'

　　This additional ceremony seemed somewhat stately; however, Irepaired to my room, and, with Mrs. Fairfax's aid, replaced my blackstuff dress by one of black silk; the best and the only additional oneI had, except one of light grey, which, in my Lowood notions of thetoilette, I thought too fine to be worn, except on first-rateoccasions.

　　'You want a brooch,' said Mrs. Fairfax. I had a single little pearlornament which Miss Temple gave me as a parting keepsake: I put it on,and then we went downstairs. Unused as I was to strangers, it wasrather a trial to appear thus formally summoned in Mr. Rochester'spresence. I let Mrs. Fairfax precede me into the dining-room, and keptin her shade as we crossed that apartment; and, passing the arch,whose curtain was now dropped, entered the elegant recess beyond.

　　Two wax candles stood lighted on the table, and two on themantelpiece; basking in the light and heat of a superb fire, layPilot- Adele knelt near him. Half reclined on a couch appeared Mr.Rochester, his foot supported by the cushion; he was looking atAdele and the dog: the fire shone full on his face. I knew mytraveller with his broad and jetty eyebrows; his square forehead, madesquarer by the horizontal sweep of his black hair. I recognised hisdecisive nose, more remarkable for character than beauty; his fullnostrils, denoting, I thought, choler; his grim mouth, chin, andjaw- yes, all three were very grim, and no mistake. His shape, nowdivested of cloak, I perceived harmonised in squareness with hisphysiognomy: I suppose it was a good figure in the athletic sense ofthe term- broad chested and thin flanked, though neither tall norgraceful.

　　Mr. Rochester must have been aware of the entrance of Mrs.Fairfax and myself; but it appeared he was not in the mood to noticeus, for he never lifted his head as we approached.

　　'Here is Miss Eyre, sir,' said Mrs. Fairfax, in her quiet way. Hebowed, still not taking his eyes from the group of the dog and child.

　　'Let Miss Eyre be seated,' said he: and there was something inthe forced stiff bow, in the impatient yet formal tone, which seemedfurther to express, 'What the deuce is it to me whether Miss Eyre bethere or not? At this moment I am not disposed to accost her.'

　　I sat down quite disembarrassed. A reception of finished politenesswould probably have confused me: I could not have returned or repaidit by answering grace and elegance on my part; but harsh capricelaid me under no obligation; on the contrary, a decent quiescence,under the freak of manner, gave me the advantage. Besides, theeccentricity of the proceeding was piquant: I felt interested to seehow he would go on.

　　He went on as a statue would, that is, he neither spoke normoved. Mrs. Fairfax seemed to think it necessary that some oneshould be amiable, and she began to talk. Kindly, as usual- and, asusual, rather trite- she condoled with him on the pressure of businesshe had had all day; on the annoyance it must have been to him withthat painful sprain: then she commended his patience andperseverance in going through with it.

　　'Madam, I should like some tea,' was the sole rejoinder she got.She hastened to ring the bell; and when the tray came, she proceededto arrange the cups, spoons, etc., with assiduous celerity. I andAdele went to the table; but the master did not leave his couch.

　　'Will you hand Mr. Rochester's cup?' said Mrs. Fairfax to me;'Adele might perhaps spill it.'

　　I did as requested. As he took the cup from my hand, Adele,thinking the moment propitious for making a request in my favour,cried out-

　　'N'est-ce pas, monsieur, qu'il y a un cadeau pour Mademoiselle Eyredans votre petit coffre?'

　　'Who talks of cadeaux?' said he gruffly. 'Did you expect a present,Miss Eyre? Are you fond of presents?' and he searched my face witheyes that I saw were dark, irate, and piercing.

　　'I hardly know, sir; I have little experience of them: they aregenerally thought pleasant things.'

　　'Generally thought? But what do you think?'

　　'I should be obliged to take time, sir, before I could give youan answer worthy of your acceptance: a present has many faces to it,has it not? and one should consider all, before pronouncing an opinionas to its nature.'

　　'Miss Eyre, you are not so unsophisticated as Adele: she demandsa "cadeau," clamorously, the moment she sees me: you beat about thebush.'

　　'Because I have less confidence in my deserts than Adele has: shecan prefer the claim of old acquaintance, and the right too of custom;for she says you have always been in the habit of giving herplaythings; but if I had to make out a case I should be puzzled, sinceI am a stranger, and have done nothing to entitle me to anacknowledgment.'

　　'Oh, don't fall back on over-modesty! I have examined Adele, andfind you have taken great pains with her: she is not bright, she hasno talents; yet in a short time she has made much improvement.'

　　'Sir, you have now given me my "cadeau"; I am obliged to you: it isthe meed teachers most covet-praise of their pupils' progress.'

　　'Humph!' said Mr. Rochester, and he took his tea in silence.

　　'Come to the fire,' said the master, when the tray was takenaway, and Mrs. Fairfax had settled into a corner with her knitting;while Adele was leading me by the hand round the room, showing methe beautiful books and ornaments on the consoles and chiffonnieres.We obeyed, as in duty bound; Adele wanted to take a seat on my knee,but she was ordered to amuse herself with Pilot.

　　'You have been resident in my house three months?'

　　'Yes, sir.'

　　'And you came from-?'

　　'Ah! a charitable concern. How long were you there?'

　　'Eight years.'

　　'Eight years! you must be tenacious of life. I thought half thetime in such a place would have done up any constitution! No wonderyou have rather the look of another world. I marvelled where you hadgot that sort of face. When you came on me in Hay Lane last night, Ithought unaccountably of fairy tales, and had half a mind to demandwhether you had bewitched my horse: I am not sure yet. Who are yourparents?'

　　'I have none.'

　　'Nor ever had, I suppose: do you remember them?'

　　'No.'

　　'I thought not. And so you were waiting for your people when yousat on that stile?'

　　'For whom, sir?'

　　'For the men in green: it was a proper moonlight evening forthem. Did I break through one of your rings, that you spread thatdamned ice on the causeway?'

　　I shook my head. 'The men in green all forsook England a hundredyears ago,' said I, speaking as seriously as he had done. 'And noteven in Hay Lane, or the fields about it, could you find a trace ofthem. I don't think either summer or harvest, or winter moon, willever shine on their revels more.'

　　Mrs. Fairfax had dropped her knitting, and, with raised eyebrows,seemed wondering what sort of talk this was.

　　'Well,' resumed Mr. Rochester, 'if you disown parents, you musthave some sort of kinsfolk: uncles and aunts?'

　　'No; none that I ever saw.'

　　'And your home?'

　　'I have none.'

　　'Where do your brothers and sisters live?'

　　'I have no brothers or sisters.'

　　'Who recommended you to come here?'

　　'I advertised, and Mrs. Fairfax answered my advertisement.'

　　'Yes,' said the good lady, who now knew what ground we were upon,'and I am daily thankful for the choice Providence led me to make.Miss Eyre has been an invaluable companion to me, and a kind andcareful teacher to Adele.'

　　'Don't trouble yourself to give her a character,' returned Mr.Rochester: 'eulogiums will not bias me; I shall judge for myself.She began by felling my horse.'

　　'Sir?' said Mrs. Fairfax.

　　'I have to thank her for this sprain.'

　　The widow looked bewildered.

　　'Miss Eyre, have you ever lived in a town?'

　　'No, sir.'

　　'Have you seen much society?'

　　'None but the pupils and teachers of Lowood, and now the inmates ofThornfield.'

　　'Have you read much?'

　　'Only such books as came in my way; and they have not been numerousor very learned.'

　　'You have lived the life of a nun: no doubt you are well drilled inreligious forms;- Brocklehurst, who I understand directs Lowood, isa parson, is he not?'

　　'Yes, sir.'

　　'And you girls probably worshipped him, as a convent full ofreligieuses would worship their director.'

　　'Oh, no.'

　　'You are very cool! No! What! a novice not worship her priest! Thatsounds blasphemous.'

　　'I disliked Mr. Brocklehurst; and I was not alone in the feeling.He is a harsh man; at once pompous and meddling; he cut off ourhair; and for economy's sake bought us bad needles and thread, withwhich we could hardly sew.'

　　'That was very false economy,' remarked Mrs. Fairfax, who now againcaught the drift of the dialogue.

　　'And was that the head and front of his offending?' demanded Mr.Rochester.

　　'He starved us when he had the sole superintendence of theprovision department, before the committee was appointed; and he boredus with long lectures once a week, and with evening readings frombooks of his own inditing, about sudden deaths and judgments, whichmade us afraid to go to bed.'

　　'What age were you when you went to Lowood?'

　　'About ten.'

　　'And you stayed there eight years: you are now, then, eighteen?'

　　I assented.

　　'Arithmetic, you see, is useful; without its aid, I should hardlyhave been able to guess your age. It is a point difficult to fix wherethe features and countenance are so much at variance as in yourcase. And now what did you learn at Lowood? Can you play?'

　　'A little.'

　　'Of course: that is the established answer. Go into the library-I mean, if you please.- (Excuse my tone of command; I am used tosay, "Do this," and it is done: I cannot alter my customary habits forone new inmate.)- Go, then, into the library; take a candle withyou; leave the door open; sit down to the piano, and play a tune.'

　　I departed, obeying his directions.

　　'Enough!' he called out in a few minutes. 'You play a little, Isee; like any other English school-girl; perhaps rather better thansome, but not well.'

　　I closed the piano and returned. Mr. Rochester continued-

　　'Adele showed me some sketches this morning, which she said wereyours. I don't know whether they were entirely of your doing; probablya master aided you?'

　　'No, indeed!' I interjected.

　　'Ah! that pricks pride. Well, fetch me your portfolio, if you canvouch for its contents being original; but don't pass your word unlessyou are certain: I can recognise patchwork.'

　　'Then I will say nothing, and you shall judge for yourself, sir.'

　　I brought the portfolio from the library.

　　'Approach the table,' said he; and I wheeled it to his couch. Adeleand Mrs. Fairfax drew near to see the pictures.

　　'No crowding,' said Mr. Rochester: 'take the drawings from myhand as I finish with them; but don't push your faces up to mine.'

　　He deliberately scrutinised each sketch and painting. Three he laidaside; the others, when he had examined them, he swept from him.

　　'Take them off to the other table, Mrs. Fairfax,' said he, 'andlook at them with Adele;- you' (glancing at me) 'resume your seat, andanswer my questions. I perceive those pictures were done by onehand: was that hand yours?'

　　'Yes.'

　　'And when did you find time to do them? They have taken muchtime, and some thought.'

　　'I did them in the last two vacations I spent at Lowood, when I hadno other occupation.'

　　'Where did you get your copies?'

　　'Out of my head.'

　　'That head I see now on your shoulders?'

　　'Yes, sir.'

　　'Has it other furniture of the same kind within?'

　　'I should think it may have: I should hope- better.'

　　He spread the pictures before him, and again surveyed themalternately.

　　While he is so occupied, I will tell you, reader, what they are:and first, I must premise that they are nothing wonderful. Thesubjects had, indeed, risen vividly on my mind. As I saw them with thespiritual eye, before I attempted to embody them, they werestriking; but my hand would not second my fancy, and in each case ithad wrought out but a pale portrait of the thing I had conceived.

　　These pictures were in water-colours. The first representedclouds low and livid, rolling over a swollen sea: all the distance wasin eclipse; so, too, was the foreground; or rather, the nearestbillows, for there was no land. One gleam of light lifted intorelief a half-submerged mast, on which sat a cormorant, dark andlarge, with wings flecked with foam; its beak held a gold bracelet setwith gems, that I had touched with as brilliant tints as my palettecould yield, and as glittering distinctness as my pencil could impart.Sinking below the bird and mast, a drowned corpse glanced throughthe green water; a fair arm was the only limb clearly visible,whence the bracelet had been washed or torn.

　　The second picture contained for foreground only the dim peak ofa hill, with grass and some leaves slanting as if by a breeze.Beyond and above spread an expanse of sky, dark blue as at twilight:rising into the sky was a woman's shape to the bust, portrayed intints as dusk and soft as I could combine. The dim forehead wascrowned with a star; the lineaments below were seen as through thesuffusion of vapour; the eyes shone dark and wild; the hair streamedshadowy, like a beamless cloud torn by storm or by electric travail.On the neck lay a pale reflection like moonlight; the same faintlustre touched the train of thin clouds from which rose and bowed thisvision of the Evening Star.

　　The third showed the pinnacle of an iceberg piercing a polar wintersky: a muster of northern lights reared their dim lances, closeserried, along the horizon. Throwing these into distance, rose, in theforeground, a head,- a colossal head, inclined towards the iceberg,and resting against it. Two thin hands, joined under the forehead, andsupporting it, drew up before the lower features a sable veil; abrow quite bloodless, white as bone, and an eye hollow and fixed,blank of meaning but for the glassiness of despair, alone werevisible. Above the temples, amidst wreathed turban folds of blackdrapery, vague in its character and consistency as cloud, gleamed aring of white flame, gemmed with sparkles of a more lurid tinge.This pale crescent was 'the likeness of a kingly crown'; what itdiademed was 'the shape which shape had none.'

　　'Were you happy when you painted these pictures?' asked Mr.Rochester presently.

　　'I was absorbed, sir: yes, and I was happy. To paint them, inshort, was to enjoy one of the keenest pleasures I have ever known.'

　　'That is not saying much. Your pleasures, by your own account, havebeen few; but I daresay you did exist in a kind of artist'sdreamland while you blent and arranged these strange tints. Did yousit at them long each day?'

　　'I had nothing else to do, because it was the vacation, and I satat them from morning till noon, and from noon till night: the lengthof the midsummer days favoured my inclination to apply.'

　　'And you felt self-satisfied with the result of your ardentlabours?'

　　'Far from it. I was tormented by the contrast between my idea andmy handiwork: in each case I had imagined something which I wasquite powerless to realise.'

　　'Not quite: you have secured the shadow of your thought; but nomore, probably. You had not enough of the artist's skill and scienceto give it full being: yet the drawings are, for a school-girl,peculiar. As to the thoughts, they are elfish. These eyes in theEvening Star you must have seen in a dream. How could you make themlook so clear, and yet not at all brilliant? for the planet abovequells their rays. And what meaning is that in their solemn depth? Andwho taught you to paint wind? There is a high gale in that sky, and onthis hill-top. Where did you see Latmos? For that is Latmos. There!put the drawings away!'

　　I had scarce tied the strings of the portfolio, when, looking athis watch, he said abruptly-

　　'It is nine o'clock: what are you about, Miss Eyre, to let Adelesit up so long? Take her to bed!'

　　Adele went to kiss him before quitting the room: he endured thecaress, but scarcely seemed to relish it more than Pilot would havedone, nor so much.

　　'I wish you all good-night, now,' said he, making a movement of thehand towards the door, in token that he was tired of our company,and wished to dismiss us. Mrs. Fairfax folded up her knitting: Itook my portfolio: we curtseyed to him, received a frigid bow inreturn, and so withdrew.

　　'You said Mr. Rochester was not strikingly peculiar, Mrs. Fairfax,'I observed, when I rejoined her in her room, after putting Adele tobed.

　　'Well, is he?'

　　'I think so: he is very changeful and abrupt.'

　　'True: no doubt he may appear so to a stranger, but I am soaccustomed to his manner, I never think of it; and then, if he haspeculiarities of temper, allowance should be made.'

　　'Why?'

　　'Partly because it is his nature- and we can none of us help ournature; and partly because he has painful thoughts, no doubt, toharass him, and make his spirits unequal.'

　　'What about?'

　　'Family troubles, for one thing.'

　　'But he has no family.'

　　'Not now, but he has had- or, at least, relatives. He lost hiselder brother a few years since.'

　　'His elder brother?'

　　'Yes. The present Mr. Rochester has not been very long inpossession of the property; only about nine years.'

　　'Nine years is a tolerable time. Was he so very fond of his brotheras to be still inconsolable for his loss?'

　　'Why, no- perhaps not. I believe there were somemisunderstandings between them. Mr. Rowland Rochester was not quitejust to Mr. Edward; and perhaps he prejudiced his father againsthim. The old gentleman was fond of money, and anxious to keep thefamily estate together. He did not like to diminish the property bydivision, and yet he was anxious that Mr. Edward should have wealth,too, to keep up the consequence of the name; and, soon after he was ofage, some steps were taken that were not quite fair, and made agreat deal of mischief. Old Mr. Rochester and Mr. Rowland combinedto bring Mr. Edward into what he considered a painful position, forthe sake of making his fortune: what the precise nature of thatposition was I never clearly knew, but his spirit could not brook whathe had to suffer in it. He is not very forgiving: he broke with hisfamily, and now for many years he has led an unsettled kind of life. Idon't think he has ever been resident at Thornfield for a fortnighttogether, since the death of his brother without a will left himmaster of the estate; and, indeed, no wonder he shuns the old place.'

　　'Why should he shun it?'

　　'Perhaps he thinks it gloomy.'

　　The answer was evasive. I should have liked something clearer;but Mrs. Fairfax either could not, or would not, give me more explicitinformation of the origin and nature of Mr. Rochester's trials. Sheaverred they were a mystery to herself, and that what she knew waschiefly from conjecture. It was evident, indeed, that she wished me todrop the subject, which I did accordingly.

　　I lingered at the gates; I lingered on the lawn; I pacedbackwards and forwards on the pavement; the shutters of the glass doorwere closed; I could not see into the interior; and both my eyes andspirit seemed drawn from the gloomy house- from the grey hollow filledwith rayless cells, as it appeared to me- to that sky expandedbefore me,- a blue sea absolved from taint of cloud; the moonascending it in solemn march; her orb seeming to look up as she leftthe hill-tops, from behind which she had come, far and farther belowher, and aspired to the zenith, midnight dark in its fathomlessdepth and measureless distance; and for those trembling stars thatfollowed her course; they made my heart tremble, my veins glow whenI viewed them. Little things recall us to earth; the clock struck inthe hall; that sufficed; I turned from moon and stars, opened aside-door, and went in.

　　The hall was not dark, nor yet was it lit, only by the high-hungbronze lamp; a warm glow suffused both it and the lower steps of theoak staircase. This ruddy shine issued from the great dining-room,whose two-leaved door stood open, and showed a genial fire in thegrate, glancing on marble hearth and brass fire-irons, and revealingpurple draperies and polished furniture, in the most pleasantradiance. It revealed, too, a group near the mantelpiece: I hadscarcely caught it, and scarcely become aware of a cheerful minglingof voices, amongst which I seemed to distinguish the tones of Adele,when the door closed.

　　I hastened to Mrs. Fairfax's room; there was a fire there too,but no candle, and no Mrs. Fairfax. Instead, all alone, sittingupright on the rug, and gazing with gravity at the blaze, I beheld agreat black and white long-haired dog, just like the Gytrash of thelane. It was so like it that I went forward and said- 'Pilot,' and thething got up and came to me and snuffed me. I caressed him, and hewagged his great tail; but he looked an eerie creature to be alonewith, and I could not tell whence he had come. I rang the bell, forI wanted a candle; and I wanted, too, to get an account of thisvisitant. Leah entered.

　　'What dog is this?'

　　'He came with master.'

　　'With whom?'

　　'With master- Mr. Rochester- he is just arrived.'

　　'Indeed! and is Mrs. Fairfax with him?'

　　'Yes, and Miss Adele; they are in the dining-room, and John is gonefor a surgeon; for master has had an accident; his horse fell andhis ankle is sprained.'

　　'Did the horse fall in Hay Lane?'

　　'Yes, coming down-hill; it slipped on some ice.'

　　'Ah! Bring me a candle, will you, Leah?'

　　Leah brought it; she entered, followed by Mrs. Fairfax, whorepeated the news; adding that Mr. Carter the surgeon was come, andwas now with Mr. Rochester: then she hurried out to give ordersabout tea, and I went upstairs to take off my things.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER XIII

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　MR. ROCHESTER, it seems, by the surgeon's orders, went to bed earlythat night; nor did he rise soon next morning. When he did comedown, it was to attend to business: his agent and some of histenants were arrived, and waiting to speak with him.

　　Adele and I had now to vacate the library: it would be in dailyrequisition as a reception-room for callers. A fire was lit in anapartment upstairs, and there I carried our books, and arranged it forthe future schoolroom. I discerned in the course of the morning thatThornfield Hall was a changed place: no longer silent as a church,it echoed every hour or two to a knock at the door, or a clang ofthe bell: steps, too, often traversed the hall, and new voices spokein different keys below; a rill from the outer world was flowingthrough it; it had a master: for my part, I liked it better.

　　Adele was not easy to teach that day; she could not apply: she keptrunning to the door and looking over the banisters to see if she couldget a glimpse of Mr. Rochester; then she coined pretexts to godownstairs, in order, as I shrewdly suspected, to visit the library,where I knew she was not wanted; then, when I got a little angry,and made her sit still, she continued to talk incessantly of her 'ami,Monsieur Edouard Fairfax de Rochester,' as she dubbed him (I had notbefore heard his prenomens), and to conjecture what presents he hadbrought her: for it appears he had intimated the night before, thatwhen his luggage came from Millcote, there would be found amongst it alittle box in whose contents she had an interest.

　　'Et cela doit signifier,' said she, 'qu'il y aura la dedans uncadeau pour moi, et peut-etre pour vous aussi, mademoiselle.Monsieur a parle de vous: il m'a demande le nom de ma gouvernante,et si elle n'etait pas une petite personne, assez mince et un peupale. J'ai dit qu'oui: car c'est vrai, n'est-ce pas, mademoiselle?'

　　I and my pupil dined as usual in Mrs. Fairfax's parlour; theafternoon was wild and snowy, and we passed it in the schoolroom. Atdark I allowed Adele to put away books and work, and to rundownstairs; for, from the comparative silence below, and from thecessation of appeals to the door-bell, I conjectured that Mr.Rochester was now at liberty. Left alone, I walked to the window;but nothing was to be seen thence: twilight and snowflakes togetherthickened the air, and hid the very shrubs on the lawn. I let down thecurtain and went back to the fireside.

　　In the clear embers I was tracing a view, not unlike a picture Iremembered to have seen of the castle of Heidelberg, on the Rhine,when Mrs. Fairfax came in, breaking up by her entrance the fierymosaic I had been piecing together, and scattering too some heavyunwelcome thoughts that were beginning to throng on my solitude.

　　'Mr. Rochester would be glad if you and your pupil would take teawith him in the drawing-room this evening,' said she: 'he has beenso much engaged all day that he could not ask to see you before.'

　　'When is his tea-time?' I inquired.

　　'Oh, at six o'clock: he keeps early hours in the country. You hadbetter change your frock now; I will go with you and fasten it. Hereis a candle.'

　　'Is it necessary to change my frock?'

　　'Yes, you had better: I always dress for the evening when Mr.Rochester is here.'

　　This additional ceremony seemed somewhat stately; however, Irepaired to my room, and, with Mrs. Fairfax's aid, replaced my blackstuff dress by one of black silk; the best and the only additional oneI had, except one of light grey, which, in my Lowood notions of thetoilette, I thought too fine to be worn, except on first-rateoccasions.

　　'You want a brooch,' said Mrs. Fairfax. I had a single little pearlornament which Miss Temple gave me as a parting keepsake: I put it on,and then we went downstairs. Unused as I was to strangers, it wasrather a trial to appear thus formally summoned in Mr. Rochester'spresence. I let Mrs. Fairfax precede me into the dining-room, and keptin her shade as we crossed that apartment; and, passing the arch,whose curtain was now dropped, entered the elegant recess beyond.

　　Two wax candles stood lighted on the table, and two on themantelpiece; basking in the light and heat of a superb fire, layPilot- Adele knelt near him. Half reclined on a couch appeared Mr.Rochester, his foot supported by the cushion; he was looking atAdele and the dog: the fire shone full on his face. I knew mytraveller with his broad and jetty eyebrows; his square forehead, madesquarer by the horizontal sweep of his black hair. I recognised hisdecisive nose, more remarkable for character than beauty; his fullnostrils, denoting, I thought, choler; his grim mouth, chin, andjaw- yes, all three were very grim, and no mistake. His shape, nowdivested of cloak, I perceived harmonised in squareness with hisphysiognomy: I suppose it was a good figure in the athletic sense ofthe term- broad chested and thin flanked, though neither tall norgraceful.

　　Mr. Rochester must have been aware of the entrance of Mrs.Fairfax and myself; but it appeared he was not in the mood to noticeus, for he never lifted his head as we approached.

　　'Here is Miss Eyre, sir,' said Mrs. Fairfax, in her quiet way. Hebowed, still not taking his eyes from the group of the dog and child.

　　'Let Miss Eyre be seated,' said he: and there was something inthe forced stiff bow, in the impatient yet formal tone, which seemedfurther to express, 'What the deuce is it to me whether Miss Eyre bethere or not? At this moment I am not disposed to accost her.'

　　I sat down quite disembarrassed. A reception of finished politenesswould probably have confused me: I could not have returned or repaidit by answering grace and elegance on my part; but harsh capricelaid me under no obligation; on the contrary, a decent quiescence,under the freak of manner, gave me the advantage. Besides, theeccentricity of the proceeding was piquant: I felt interested to seehow he would go on.

　　He went on as a statue would, that is, he neither spoke normoved. Mrs. Fairfax seemed to think it necessary that some oneshould be amiable, and she began to talk. Kindly, as usual- and, asusual, rather trite- she condoled with him on the pressure of businesshe had had all day; on the annoyance it must have been to him withthat painful sprain: then she commended his patience andperseverance in going through with it.

　　'Madam, I should like some tea,' was the sole rejoinder she got.She hastened to ring the bell; and when the tray came, she proceededto arrange the cups, spoons, etc., with assiduous celerity. I andAdele went to the table; but the master did not leave his couch.

　　'Will you hand Mr. Rochester's cup?' said Mrs. Fairfax to me;'Adele might perhaps spill it.'

　　I did as requested. As he took the cup from my hand, Adele,thinking the moment propitious for making a request in my favour,cried out-

　　'N'est-ce pas, monsieur, qu'il y a un cadeau pour Mademoiselle Eyredans votre petit coffre?'

　　'Who talks of cadeaux?' said he gruffly. 'Did you expect a present,Miss Eyre? Are you fond of presents?' and he searched my face witheyes that I saw were dark, irate, and piercing.

　　'I hardly know, sir; I have little experience of them: they aregenerally thought pleasant things.'

　　'Generally thought? But what do you think?'

　　'I should be obliged to take time, sir, before I could give youan answer worthy of your acceptance: a present has many faces to it,has it not? and one should consider all, before pronouncing an opinionas to its nature.'

　　'Miss Eyre, you are not so unsophisticated as Adele: she demandsa "cadeau," clamorously, the moment she sees me: you beat about thebush.'

　　'Because I have less confidence in my deserts than Adele has: shecan prefer the claim of old acquaintance, and the right too of custom;for she says you have always been in the habit of giving herplaythings; but if I had to make out a case I should be puzzled, sinceI am a stranger, and have done nothing to entitle me to anacknowledgment.'

　　'Oh, don't fall back on over-modesty! I have examined Adele, andfind you have taken great pains with her: she is not bright, she hasno talents; yet in a short time she has made much improvement.'

　　'Sir, you have now given me my "cadeau"; I am obliged to you: it isthe meed teachers most covet-praise of their pupils' progress.'

　　'Humph!' said Mr. Rochester, and he took his tea in silence.

　　'Come to the fire,' said the master, when the tray was takenaway, and Mrs. Fairfax had settled into a corner with her knitting;while Adele was leading me by the hand round the room, showing methe beautiful books and ornaments on the consoles and chiffonnieres.We obeyed, as in duty bound; Adele wanted to take a seat on my knee,but she was ordered to amuse herself with Pilot.

　　'You have been resident in my house three months?'

　　'Yes, sir.'

　　'And you came from-?'

　　'Ah! a charitable concern. How long were you there?'

　　'Eight years.'

　　'Eight years! you must be tenacious of life. I thought half thetime in such a place would have done up any constitution! No wonderyou have rather the look of another world. I marvelled where you hadgot that sort of face. When you came on me in Hay Lane last night, Ithought unaccountably of fairy tales, and had half a mind to demandwhether you had bewitched my horse: I am not sure yet. Who are yourparents?'

　　'I have none.'

　　'Nor ever had, I suppose: do you remember them?'

　　'No.'

　　'I thought not. And so you were waiting for your people when yousat on that stile?'

　　'For whom, sir?'

　　'For the men in green: it was a proper moonlight evening forthem. Did I break through one of your rings, that you spread thatdamned ice on the causeway?'

　　I shook my head. 'The men in green all forsook England a hundredyears ago,' said I, speaking as seriously as he had done. 'And noteven in Hay Lane, or the fields about it, could you find a trace ofthem. I don't think either summer or harvest, or winter moon, willever shine on their revels more.'

　　Mrs. Fairfax had dropped her knitting, and, with raised eyebrows,seemed wondering what sort of talk this was.

　　'Well,' resumed Mr. Rochester, 'if you disown parents, you musthave some sort of kinsfolk: uncles and aunts?'

　　'No; none that I ever saw.'

　　'And your home?'

　　'I have none.'

　　'Where do your brothers and sisters live?'

　　'I have no brothers or sisters.'

　　'Who recommended you to come here?'

　　'I advertised, and Mrs. Fairfax answered my advertisement.'

　　'Yes,' said the good lady, who now knew what ground we were upon,'and I am daily thankful for the choice Providence led me to make.Miss Eyre has been an invaluable companion to me, and a kind andcareful teacher to Adele.'

　　'Don't trouble yourself to give her a character,' returned Mr.Rochester: 'eulogiums will not bias me; I shall judge for myself.She began by felling my horse.'

　　'Sir?' said Mrs. Fairfax.

　　'I have to thank her for this sprain.'

　　The widow looked bewildered.

　　'Miss Eyre, have you ever lived in a town?'

　　'No, sir.'

　　'Have you seen much society?'

　　'None but the pupils and teachers of Lowood, and now the inmates ofThornfield.'

　　'Have you read much?'

　　'Only such books as came in my way; and they have not been numerousor very learned.'

　　'You have lived the life of a nun: no doubt you are well drilled inreligious forms;- Brocklehurst, who I understand directs Lowood, isa parson, is he not?'

　　'Yes, sir.'

　　'And you girls probably worshipped him, as a convent full ofreligieuses would worship their director.'

　　'Oh, no.'

　　'You are very cool! No! What! a novice not worship her priest! Thatsounds blasphemous.'

　　'I disliked Mr. Brocklehurst; and I was not alone in the feeling.He is a harsh man; at once pompous and meddling; he cut off ourhair; and for economy's sake bought us bad needles and thread, withwhich we could hardly sew.'

　　'That was very false economy,' remarked Mrs. Fairfax, who now againcaught the drift of the dialogue.

　　'And was that the head and front of his offending?' demanded Mr.Rochester.

　　'He starved us when he had the sole superintendence of theprovision department, before the committee was appointed; and he boredus with long lectures once a week, and with evening readings frombooks of his own inditing, about sudden deaths and judgments, whichmade us afraid to go to bed.'

　　'What age were you when you went to Lowood?'

　　'About ten.'

　　'And you stayed there eight years: you are now, then, eighteen?'

　　I assented.

　　'Arithmetic, you see, is useful; without its aid, I should hardlyhave been able to guess your age. It is a point difficult to fix wherethe features and countenance are so much at variance as in yourcase. And now what did you learn at Lowood? Can you play?'

　　'A little.'

　　'Of course: that is the established answer. Go into the library-I mean, if you please.- (Excuse my tone of command; I am used tosay, "Do this," and it is done: I cannot alter my customary habits forone new inmate.)- Go, then, into the library; take a candle withyou; leave the door open; sit down to the piano, and play a tune.'

　　I departed, obeying his directions.

　　'Enough!' he called out in a few minutes. 'You play a little, Isee; like any other English school-girl; perhaps rather better thansome, but not well.'

　　I closed the piano and returned. Mr. Rochester continued-

　　'Adele showed me some sketches this morning, which she said wereyours. I don't know whether they were entirely of your doing; probablya master aided you?'

　　'No, indeed!' I interjected.

　　'Ah! that pricks pride. Well, fetch me your portfolio, if you canvouch for its contents being original; but don't pass your word unlessyou are certain: I can recognise patchwork.'

　　'Then I will say nothing, and you shall judge for yourself, sir.'

　　I brought the portfolio from the library.

　　'Approach the table,' said he; and I wheeled it to his couch. Adeleand Mrs. Fairfax drew near to see the pictures.

　　'No crowding,' said Mr. Rochester: 'take the drawings from myhand as I finish with them; but don't push your faces up to mine.'

　　He deliberately scrutinised each sketch and painting. Three he laidaside; the others, when he had examined them, he swept from him.

　　'Take them off to the other table, Mrs. Fairfax,' said he, 'andlook at them with Adele;- you' (glancing at me) 'resume your seat, andanswer my questions. I perceive those pictures were done by onehand: was that hand yours?'

　　'Yes.'

　　'And when did you find time to do them? They have taken muchtime, and some thought.'

　　'I did them in the last two vacations I spent at Lowood, when I hadno other occupation.'

　　'Where did you get your copies?'

　　'Out of my head.'

　　'That head I see now on your shoulders?'

　　'Yes, sir.'

　　'Has it other furniture of the same kind within?'

　　'I should think it may have: I should hope- better.'

　　He spread the pictures before him, and again surveyed themalternately.

　　While he is so occupied, I will tell you, reader, what they are:and first, I must premise that they are nothing wonderful. Thesubjects had, indeed, risen vividly on my mind. As I saw them with thespiritual eye, before I attempted to embody them, they werestriking; but my hand would not second my fancy, and in each case ithad wrought out but a pale portrait of the thing I had conceived.

　　These pictures were in water-colours. The first representedclouds low and livid, rolling over a swollen sea: all the distance wasin eclipse; so, too, was the foreground; or rather, the nearestbillows, for there was no land. One gleam of light lifted intorelief a half-submerged mast, on which sat a cormorant, dark andlarge, with wings flecked with foam; its beak held a gold bracelet setwith gems, that I had touched with as brilliant tints as my palettecould yield, and as glittering distinctness as my pencil could impart.Sinking below the bird and mast, a drowned corpse glanced throughthe green water; a fair arm was the only limb clearly visible,whence the bracelet had been washed or torn.

　　The second picture contained for foreground only the dim peak ofa hill, with grass and some leaves slanting as if by a breeze.Beyond and above spread an expanse of sky, dark blue as at twilight:rising into the sky was a woman's shape to the bust, portrayed intints as dusk and soft as I could combine. The dim forehead wascrowned with a star; the lineaments below were seen as through thesuffusion of vapour; the eyes shone dark and wild; the hair streamedshadowy, like a beamless cloud torn by storm or by electric travail.On the neck lay a pale reflection like moonlight; the same faintlustre touched the train of thin clouds from which rose and bowed thisvision of the Evening Star.

　　The third showed the pinnacle of an iceberg piercing a polar wintersky: a muster of northern lights reared their dim lances, closeserried, along the horizon. Throwing these into distance, rose, in theforeground, a head,- a colossal head, inclined towards the iceberg,and resting against it. Two thin hands, joined under the forehead, andsupporting it, drew up before the lower features a sable veil; abrow quite bloodless, white as bone, and an eye hollow and fixed,blank of meaning but for the glassiness of despair, alone werevisible. Above the temples, amidst wreathed turban folds of blackdrapery, vague in its character and consistency as cloud, gleamed aring of white flame, gemmed with sparkles of a more lurid tinge.This pale crescent was 'the likeness of a kingly crown'; what itdiademed was 'the shape which shape had none.'

　　'Were you happy when you painted these pictures?' asked Mr.Rochester presently.

　　'I was absorbed, sir: yes, and I was happy. To paint them, inshort, was to enjoy one of the keenest pleasures I have ever known.'

　　'That is not saying much. Your pleasures, by your own account, havebeen few; but I daresay you did exist in a kind of artist'sdreamland while you blent and arranged these strange tints. Did yousit at them long each day?'

　　'I had nothing else to do, because it was the vacation, and I satat them from morning till noon, and from noon till night: the lengthof the midsummer days favoured my inclination to apply.'

　　'And you felt self-satisfied with the result of your ardentlabours?'

　　'Far from it. I was tormented by the contrast between my idea andmy handiwork: in each case I had imagined something which I wasquite powerless to realise.'

　　'Not quite: you have secured the shadow of your thought; but nomore, probably. You had not enough of the artist's skill and scienceto give it full being: yet the drawings are, for a school-girl,peculiar. As to the thoughts, they are elfish. These eyes in theEvening Star you must have seen in a dream. How could you make themlook so clear, and yet not at all brilliant? for the planet abovequells their rays. And what meaning is that in their solemn depth? Andwho taught you to paint wind? There is a high gale in that sky, and onthis hill-top. Where did you see Latmos? For that is Latmos. There!put the drawings away!'

　　I had scarce tied the strings of the portfolio, when, looking athis watch, he said abruptly-

　　'It is nine o'clock: what are you about, Miss Eyre, to let Adelesit up so long? Take her to bed!'

　　Adele went to kiss him before quitting the room: he endured thecaress, but scarcely seemed to relish it more than Pilot would havedone, nor so much.

　　'I wish you all good-night, now,' said he, making a movement of thehand towards the door, in token that he was tired of our company,and wished to dismiss us. Mrs. Fairfax folded up her knitting: Itook my portfolio: we curtseyed to him, received a frigid bow inreturn, and so withdrew.

　　'You said Mr. Rochester was not strikingly peculiar, Mrs. Fairfax,'I observed, when I rejoined her in her room, after putting Adele tobed.

　　'Well, is he?'

　　'I think so: he is very changeful and abrupt.'

　　'True: no doubt he may appear so to a stranger, but I am soaccustomed to his manner, I never think of it; and then, if he haspeculiarities of temper, allowance should be made.'

　　'Why?'

　　'Partly because it is his nature- and we can none of us help ournature; and partly because he has painful thoughts, no doubt, toharass him, and make his spirits unequal.'

　　'What about?'

　　'Family troubles, for one thing.'

　　'But he has no family.'

　　'Not now, but he has had- or, at least, relatives. He lost hiselder brother a few years since.'

　　'His elder brother?'

　　'Yes. The present Mr. Rochester has not been very long inpossession of the property; only about nine years.'

　　'Nine years is a tolerable time. Was he so very fond of his brotheras to be still inconsolable for his loss?'

　
　　　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jane Eyre - Charlotte Bronte　　

　　CHAPTER I

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　THERE was no possibility of taking a walk that day. We had beenwandering, indeed, in the leafless shrubbery an hour in the morning;but since dinner (Mrs. Reed, when there was no company, dined early)the cold winter wind had brought with it clouds so sombre, and arain so penetrating, that further outdoor exercise was now out ofthe question.

　　I was glad of it: I never liked long walks, especially on chillyafternoons: dreadful to me was the coming home in the raw twilight,with nipped fingers and toes, and a heart saddened by the chidingsof Bessie, the nurse, and humbled by the consciousness of myphysical inferiority to Eliza, John, and Georgiana Reed.

　　The said Eliza, John, and Georgiana were now clustered roundtheir mama in the drawing-room: she lay reclined on a sofa by thefireside, and with her darlings about her (for the time neitherquarrelling nor crying) looked perfectly happy. Me, she haddispensed from joining the group; saying, 'She regretted to be underthe necessity of keeping me at a distance; but that until she heardfrom Bessie, and could discover by her own observation, that I wasendeavouring in good earnest to acquire a more sociable andchildlike disposition, a more attractive and sprightly manner-something lighter, franker, more natural, as it were- she reallymust exclude me from privileges intended only for contented, happy,little children.'

　　'What does Bessie say I have done?' I asked.

　　'Jane, I don't like cavillers or questioners; besides, there issomething truly forbidding in a child taking up her elders in thatmanner. Be seated somewhere; and until you can speak pleasantly,remain silent.'

　　A small breakfast-room adjoined the drawing-room, I slipped inthere. It contained a bookcase: I soon possessed myself of a volume,taking care that it should be one stored with pictures. I mounted intothe window-seat: gathering up my feet, I sat cross-legged, like aTurk; and, having drawn the red moreen curtain nearly close, I wasshrined in double retirement.

　　Folds of scarlet drapery shut in my view to the right hand; tothe left were the clear panes of glass, protecting, but not separatingme from the drear November day. At intervals, while turning over theleaves of my book, I studied the aspect of that winter afternoon.Afar, it offered a pale blank of mist and cloud; near a scene of wetlawn and storm-beat shrub, with ceaseless rain sweeping away wildlybefore a long and lamentable blast.

　　I returned to my book- Bewick's History of British Birds: theletterpress thereof I cared little for, generally speaking; and yetthere were certain introductory pages that, child as I was, I couldnot pass quite as a blank. They were those which treat of the hauntsof sea-fowl; of 'the solitary rocks and promontories' by them onlyinhabited; of the coast of Norway, studded with isles from itssouthern extremity, the Lindeness, or Naze, to the North Cape-

　　'Where the Northern Ocean, in vast whirls,

　　Boils round the naked, melancholy isles

　　Of farthest Thule; and the Atlantic surge

　　Pours in among the stormy Hebrides.'

　　Nor could I pass unnoticed the suggestion of the bleak shores ofLapland, Siberia, Spitzbergen, Nova Zembla, Iceland, Greenland, with'the vast sweep of the Arctic Zone, and those forlorn regions ofdreary space,- that reservoir of frost and snow, where firm fieldsof ice, the accumulation of centuries of winters, glazed in Alpineheights above heights, surround the pole and concentre themultiplied rigours of extreme cold.' Of these death-white realms Iformed an idea of my own: shadowy, like all the half-comprehendednotions that float dim through children's brains, but strangelyimpressive. The words in these introductory pages connected themselveswith the succeeding vignettes, and gave significance to the rockstanding up alone in a sea of billow and spray; to the broken boatstranded on a desolate coast; to the cold and ghastly moon glancingthrough bars of cloud at a wreck just sinking.

　　I cannot tell what sentiment haunted the quite solitary churchyard,with its inscribed headstone; its gate, its two trees, its lowhorizon, girdled by a broken wall, and its newly-risen crescent,attesting the hour of eventide.

　　The two ships becalmed on a torpid sea, I believed to be marinephantoms.

　　The fiend pinning down the thief's pack behind him, I passed overquickly: it was an object of terror.

　　So was the black horned thing seated aloof on a rock, surveying adistant crowd surrounding a gallows.

　　Each picture told a story; mysterious often to my undevelopedunderstanding and imperfect feelings, yet ever profoundly interesting:as interesting as the tales Bessie sometimes narrated on winterevenings, when she chanced to be in good humour; and when, havingbrought her ironing-table to the nursery hearth, she allowed us to sitabout it, and while she got up Mrs. Reed's lace frills, and crimpedher nightcap borders, fed our eager attention with passages of loveand adventure taken from old fairy tales and other ballads; or (asat a later period I discovered) from the pages of Pamela, and Henry,Earl of Moreland.

　　With Bewick on my knee, I was then happy: happy at least in my way.I feared nothing but interruption, and that came too soon. Thebreakfast-room door opened.

　　'Boh! Madam Mope!' cried the voice of John Reed; then he paused: hefound the room apparently empty.

　　'Where the dickens is she!' he continued. 'Lizzy! Georgy!(calling to his sisters) Joan is not here: tell mama she is run outinto the rain- bad animal!'

　　'It is well I drew the curtain,' thought I; and I wishedfervently he might not discover my hiding-place: nor would John Reedhave found it out himself; he was not quick either of vision orconception; but Eliza just put her head in at the door, and said atonce-

　　'She is in the window-seat, to be sure, Jack.'

　　And I came out immediately, for I trembled at the idea of beingdragged forth by the said Jack.

　　'What do you want?' I asked, with awkward diffidence.

　　'Say, "What do you want, Master Reed?"' was the answer. 'I want youto come here;' and seating himself in an armchair, he intimated by agesture that I was to approach and stand before him.

　　John Reed was a schoolboy of fourteen years old; four years olderthan I, for I was but ten: large and stout for his age, with a dingyand unwholesome skin; thick lineaments in a spacious visage, heavylimbs and large extremities. He gorged himself habitually at table,which made him bilious, and gave him a dim and bleared eye andflabby cheeks. He ought now to have been at school; but his mama hadtaken him home for a month or two, 'on account of his delicatehealth.' Mr. Miles, the master, affirmed that he would do very well ifhe had fewer cakes and sweetmeats sent him from home; but the mother'sheart turned from an opinion so harsh, and inclined rather to the morerefined idea that John's sallowness was owing to over-application and,perhaps, to pining after home.

　　John had not much affection for his mother and sisters, and anantipathy to me. He bullied and punished me; not two or three times inthe week, nor once or twice in the day, but continually: every nerve Ihad feared him, and every morsel of flesh in my bones shrank when hecame near. There were moments when I was bewildered by the terror heinspired, because I had no appeal whatever against either hismenaces or his inflictions; the servants did not like to offendtheir young master by taking my part against him, and Mrs. Reed wasblind and deaf on the subject: she never saw him strike or heard himabuse me, though he did both now and then in her very presence, morefrequently, however, behind her back.

　　Habitually obedient to John, I came up to his chair: he spentsome three minutes in thrusting out his tongue at me as far as hecould without damaging the roots: I knew he would soon strike, andwhile dreading the blow, I mused on the disgusting and ugly appearanceof him who would presently deal it. I wonder if he read that notion inmy face; for, all at once, without speaking, he struck suddenly andstrongly. I tottered, and on regaining my equilibrium retired back astep or two from his chair.

　　'That is for your impudence in answering mama awhile since,' saidhe, 'and for your sneaking way of getting behind curtains, and for thelook you had in your eyes two minutes since, you rat!'

　　Accustomed to John Reed's abuse, I never had an idea of replying toit; my care was how to endure the blow which would certainly followthe insult.

　　'What were you doing behind the curtain?' he asked.

　　'I was reading.'

　　'Show the book.'

　　I returned to the window and fetched it thence.

　　'You have no business to take our books; you are a dependant,mama says; you have no money; your father left you none; you oughtto beg, and not to live here with gentlemen's children like us, andeat the same meals we do, and wear clothes at our mama's expense. Now,I'll teach you to rummage my bookshelves: for they are mine; all thehouse belongs to me, or will do in a few years. Go and stand by thedoor, out of the way of the mirror and the windows.'

　　I did so, not at first aware what was his intention; but when I sawhim lift and poise the book and stand in act to hurl it, Iinstinctively started aside with a cry of alarm: not soon enough,however; the volume was flung, it hit me, and I fell, striking my headagainst the door and cutting it. The cut bled, the pain was sharp:my terror had passed its climax; other feelings succeeded.

　　'Wicked and cruel boy!' I said. 'You are like a murderer- you arelike a slave-driver- you are like the Roman emperors!'

　　I had read Goldsmith's History of Rome, and had formed my opinionof Nero, Caligula, etc. Also I had drawn parallels in silence, which Inever thought thus to have declared aloud.

　　'What! what!' he cried. 'Did she say that to me? Did you hearher, Eliza and Georgiana? Won't I tell mama? but first-'

　　He ran headlong at me: I felt him grasp my hair and my shoulder: hehad closed with a desperate thing. I really saw in him a tyrant, amurderer. I felt a drop or two of blood from my head trickle down myneck, and was sensible of somewhat pungent suffering: these sensationsfor the time predominated over fear, and I received him in franticsort. I don't very well know what I did with my hands, but he calledme 'Rat! Rat!' and bellowed out aloud. Aid was near him: Eliza andGeorgiana had run for Mrs. Reed, who was gone upstairs: she now cameupon the scene, followed by Bessie and her maid Abbot. We were parted:I heard the words-

　　'Dear! dear! What a fury to fly at Master John!'

　　'Did ever anybody see such a picture of passion!'

　　Then Mrs. Reed subjoined-

　　'Take her away to the red-room, and lock her in there.' Fourhands were immediately laid upon me, and I was borne upstairs.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER II--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　I RESISTED all the way: a new thing for me, and a circumstancewhich greatly strengthened the bad opinion Bessie and Miss Abbotwere disposed to entertain of me. The fact is, I was a trifle besidemyself; or rather out of myself, as the French would say: I wasconscious that a moment's mutiny had already rendered me liable tostrange penalties, and, like any other rebel slave, I felt resolved,in my desperation, to go all lengths.

　　'Hold her arms, Miss Abbot: she's like a mad cat.'

　　'For shame! for shame!' cried the lady's-maid. 'What shockingconduct, Miss Eyre, to strike a young gentleman, your benefactress'sson! Your young master.'

　　'Master! How is he my master? Am I a servant?'

　　'No; you are less than a servant, for you do nothing for your keep.There, sit down, and think over your wickedness.'

　　They had got me by this time into the apartment indicated by Mrs.Reed, and had thrust me upon a stool: my impulse was to rise from itlike a spring; their two pair of hands arrested me instantly.

　　'If you don't sit still, you must be tied down,' said Bessie. 'MissAbbot, lend me your garters; she would break mine directly.'

　　Miss Abbot turned to divest a stout leg of the necessaryligature. This preparation for bonds, and the additional ignominy itinferred, took a little of the excitement out of me.

　　'Don't take them off,' I cried; 'I will not stir.'

　　In guarantee whereof, I attached myself to my seat by my hands.

　　'Mind you don't,' said Bessie; and when she had ascertained thatI was really subsiding, she loosened her hold of me; then she and MissAbbot stood with folded arms, looking darkly and doubtfully on myface, as incredulous of my sanity.

　　'She never did so before,' at last said Bessie, turning to theAbigail.

　　'But it was always in her,' was the reply. 'I've told Missisoften my opinion about the child, and Missis agreed with me. She'san underhand little thing: I never saw a girl of her age with somuch cover.'

　　Bessie answered not; but ere long, addressing me, she said-

　　'You ought to be aware, Miss, that you are under obligations toMrs. Reed: she keeps you: if she were to turn you off, you wouldhave to go to the poorhouse.'

　　I had nothing to say to these words: they were not new to me: myvery first recollections of existence included hints of the same kind.This reproach of my dependence had become a vague sing-song in my ear:very painful and crushing, but only half intelligible. Miss Abbotjoined in-

　　'And you ought not to think yourself on an equality with the MissesReed and Master Reed, because Missis kindly allows you to be broughtup with them. They will have a great deal of money, and you willhave none: it is your place to be humble, and to try to makeyourself agreeable to them.'

　　'What we tell you is for your good,' added Bessie, in no harshvoice; 'you should try to be useful and pleasant, then, perhaps, youwould have a home here; but if you become passionate and rude,Missis will send you away, I am sure.'

　　'Besides,' said Miss Abbot, 'God will punish her: He might strikeher dead in the midst of her tantrums, and then where would she go?Come, Bessie, we will leave her: I wouldn't have her heart foranything. Say your prayers, Miss Eyre, when you are by yourself; forif you don't repent, something bad might be permitted to come down thechimney and fetch you away.'

　　They went, shutting the door, and locking it behind them.

　　The red-room was a square chamber, very seldom slept in, I mightsay never, indeed, unless when a chance influx of visitors atGateshead Hall rendered it necessary to turn to account all theaccommodation it contained: yet it was one of the largest andstateliest chambers in the mansion. A bed supported on massive pillarsof mahogany, hung with curtains of deep red damask, stood out like atabernacle in the centre; the two large windows, with their blindsalways drawn down, were half shrouded in festoons and falls of similardrapery; the carpet was red; the table at the foot of the bed wascovered with a crimson cloth; the walls were a soft fawn colour with ablush of pink in it; the wardrobe, the toilet-table, the chairs wereof darkly polished old mahogany. Out of these deep surroundingshades rose high, and glared white, the piled-up mattresses andpillows of the bed, spread with a snowy Marseilles counterpane.Scarcely less prominent was an ample cushioned easy-chair near thehead of the bed, also white, with a footstool before it; andlooking, as I thought, like a pale throne.

　　This room was chill, because it seldom had a fire; it was silent,because remote from the nursery and kitchen; solemn, because it wasknown to be so seldom entered. The housemaid alone came here onSaturdays, to wipe from the mirrors and the furniture a week's quietdust: and Mrs. Reed herself, at far intervals, visited it to reviewthe contents of a certain secret drawer in the wardrobe, where werestored divers parchments, her jewel-casket, and a miniature of herdeceased husband; and in those last words lies the secret of thered-room- the spell which kept it so lonely in spite of its grandeur.

　　Mr. Reed had been dead nine years: it was in this chamber hebreathed his last; here he lay in state; hence his coffin was borne bythe undertaker's men; and, since that day, a sense of drearyconsecration had guarded it from frequent intrusion.

　　My seat, to which Bessie and the bitter Miss Abbot had left meriveted, was a low ottoman near the marble chimney-piece; the bed rosebefore me; to my right hand there was the high, dark wardrobe, withsubdued, broken reflections varying the gloss of its panels; to myleft were the muffled windows; a great looking-glass between themrepeated the vacant majesty of the bed and room. I was not quitesure whether they had locked the door; and when I dared move, I got upand went to see. Alas! yes: no jail was ever more secure. Returning, Ihad to cross before the looking-glass; my fascinated glanceinvoluntarily explored the depth it revealed. All looked colder anddarker in that visionary hollow than in reality: and the strangelittle figure there gazing at me, with a white face and armsspecking the gloom, and glittering eyes of fear moving where allelse was still, had the effect of a real spirit: I thought it like oneof the tiny phantoms, half fairy, half imp, Bessie's evening storiesrepresented as coming out of lone, ferny dells in moors, and appearingbefore the eyes of belated travellers. I returned to my stool.

　　Superstition was with me at that moment; but it was not yet herhour for complete victory: my blood was still warm; the mood of therevolted slave was still bracing me with its bitter vigour; I had tostem a rapid rush of retrospective thought before I quailed to thedismal present.

　　All John Reed's violent tyrannies, all his sisters' proudindifference, all his mother's aversion, all the servants' partiality,turned up in my disturbed mind like a dark deposit in a turbid well.Why was I always suffering, always browbeaten, always accused, forever condemned? Why could I never please? Why was it useless to try towin any one's favour? Eliza, who, was headstrong and selfish, wasrespected. Georgiana, who had a spoiled temper, a very acrid spite,a captious and insolent carriage, was universally indulged. Herbeauty, her pink cheeks and golden curls, seemed to give delight toall who, looked at her, and to purchase indemnity for every fault.John no one thwarted, much less punished; though he twisted thenecks of the pigeons, killed the little pea-chicks, set the dogs atthe sheep, stripped the hothouse vines of their fruit, and broke thebuds off the choicest plants in the conservatory: he called his mother'old girl,' too; sometimes reviled her for her dark skin, similar tohis own; bluntly disregarded her wishes; not unfrequently tore andspoiled her silk attire; and he was still 'her own darling.' I daredcommit no fault: I strove to fulfil every duty; and I was termednaughty and tiresome, sullen and sneaking, from morning to noon, andfrom noon to night.

　　My head still ached and bled with the blow and fall I had received:no one had reproved John for wantonly striking me; and because I hadturned against him to avert farther irrational violence, I wasloaded with general opprobrium.

　　'Unjust!- unjust!' said my reason, forced by the agonising stimulusinto precocious though transitory power: and Resolve, equallywrought up, instigated some strange expedient to achieve escape frominsupportable oppression- as running away, or, if that could not beeffected, never eating or drinking more, and letting myself die.

　　What a consternation of soul was mine that dreary afternoon! Howall my brain was in tumult, and all my heart in insurrection! Yet inwhat darkness, what dense ignorance, was the mental battle fought! Icould not answer the ceaseless inward question- why I thus suffered;now, at the distance of- I will not say how many years, I see itclearly.

　　I was a discord in Gateshead Hall: I was like nobody there; I hadnothing in harmony with Mrs. Reed or her children, or her chosenvassalage. If they did not love me, in fact, as little did I lovethem. They were not bound to regard with affection a thing thatcould not sympathise with one amongst them; a heterogeneous thing,opposed to them in temperament, in capacity, in propensities; auseless thing, incapable of serving their interest, or adding to theirpleasure; a noxious thing, cherishing the germs of indignation attheir treatment, of contempt of their judgment. I know that had I beena sanguine, brilliant, careless, exacting, handsome, romping child-though equally dependent and friendless- Mrs. Reed would haveendured my presence more complacently; her children would haveentertained for me more of the cordiality of fellow-feeling; theservants would have been less prone to make me the scapegoat of thenursery.

　　Daylight began to forsake the red-room; it was past four o'clock,and the beclouded afternoon was tending to drear twilight. I heard therain still beating continuously on the staircase window, and thewind howling in the grove behind the hall; I grew by degrees cold as astone, and then my courage sank. My habitual mood of humiliation,self-doubt, forlorn depression, fell damp on the embers of my decayingire. All said I was wicked, and perhaps I might be so; what thoughthad I been but just conceiving of starving myself to death? Thatcertainly was a crime: and was I fit to die? Or was the vault underthe chancel of Gateshead Church an inviting bourne? In such vault Ihad been told did Mr. Reed lie buried; and led by this thought torecall his idea, I dwelt on it with gathering dread. I could notremember him; but I knew that he was my own uncle- my mother'sbrother- that he had taken me when a parentless infant to his house;and that in his last moments he had required a promise of Mrs. Reedthat she would rear and maintain me as one of her own children. Mrs.Reed probably considered she had kept this promise; and so she had,I dare say, as well as her nature would permit her; but how couldshe really like an interloper not of her race, and unconnected withher, after her husband's death, by any tie? It must have been mostirksome to find herself bound by a hard-wrung pledge to stand in thestead of a parent to a strange child she could not love, and to see anuncongenial alien permanently intruded on her own family group.

　　A singular notion dawned upon me. I doubted not- never doubted-that if Mr. Reed had been alive he would have treated me kindly; andnow, as I sat looking at the white bed and overshadowed walls-occasionally also turning a fascinated eye towards the dimlygleaming mirror- I began to recall what I had heard of dead men,troubled in their graves by the violation of their last wishes,revisiting the earth to punish the perjured and avenge theoppressed; and I thought Mr. Reed's spirit, harassed by the wrongsof his sister's child, might quit its abode- whether in the churchvault or in the unknown world of the departed- and rise before me inthis chamber. I wiped my tears and hushed my sobs, fearful lest anysign of violent grief might waken a preternatural voice to comfort me,or elicit from the gloom some haloed face, bending over me withstrange pity. This idea, consolatory in theory, I felt would beterrible if realised: with all my might I endeavoured to stifle it-I endeavoured to be firm. Shaking my hair from my eyes, I lifted myhead and tried to look boldly round the dark room; at this moment alight gleamed on the wall. Was it, I asked myself, a ray from the moonpenetrating some aperture in the blind? No; moonlight was still, andthis stirred; while I gazed, it glided up to the ceiling andquivered over my head. I can now conjecture readily that this streakof light was, in all likelihood, a gleam from a lantern carried bysome one across the lawn: but then, prepared as my mind was forhorror, shaken as my nerves were by agitation, I thought the swiftdarting beam was a herald of some coming vision from another world. Myheart beat thick, my head grew hot; a sound filled my ears, which Ideemed the rushing of wings; something seemed near me; I wasoppressed, suffocated: endurance broke down; I rushed to the doorand shook the lock in desperate effort. Steps came running along theouter passage; the key turned, Bessie and Abbot entered.

　　'Miss Eyre, are you ill?' said Bessie.

　　'What a dreadful noise! it went quite through me!' exclaimed Abbot.

　　'Take me out! Let me go into the nursery!' was my cry.

　　'What for? Are you hurt? Have you seen something?' again demandedBessie.

　　'Oh! I saw a light, and I thought a ghost would come.' I had nowgot hold of Bessie's hand, and she did not snatch it from me.

　　'She has screamed out on purpose,' declared Abbot, in some disgust.'And what a scream! If she had been in great pain one would haveexcused it, but she only wanted to bring us all here: I know hernaughty tricks.'

　　'What is all this?' demanded another voice peremptorily; and Mrs.Reed came along the corridor, her cap flying wide, her gown rustlingstormily. 'Abbot and Bessie, I believe I gave orders that Jane Eyreshould be left in the red-room till I came to her myself.'

　　'Miss Jane screamed so loud, ma'am,' pleaded Bessie.

　　'Let her go,' was the only answer. 'Loose Bessie's hand, child: youcannot succeed in getting out by these means, be assured. I abhorartifice, particularly in children; it is my duty to show you thattricks will not answer: you will now stay here an hour longer, andit is only on condition of perfect submission and stillness that Ishall liberate you then.'

　　'O aunt! have pity! forgive me! I cannot endure it- let me bepunished some other way! I shall be killed if-'

　　'Silence! This violence is all most repulsive:' and so, no doubt,she felt it. I was a precocious actress in her eyes; she sincerely.looked on me as a compound of virulent passions, mean spirit, anddangerous duplicity.

　　Bessie and Abbot having retreated, Mrs. Reed, impatient of my nowfrantic anguish and wild sobs, abruptly thrust me back and locked mein, without farther parley. I heard her sweeping away; and soonafter she was gone, I suppose I had a species of fit:unconsciousness closed the scene.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER III

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　THE next thing I remember is, waking up with a feeling as if Ihad had a frightful nightmare, and seeing before me a terrible redglare, crossed with thick black bars. I heard voices, too, speakingwith a hollow sound, and as if muffled by a rush of wind or water:agitation, uncertainty, and an all-predominating sense of terrorconfused my faculties. Ere long, I became aware that some one washandling me; lifting me up and supporting me in a sitting posture, andthat more tenderly than I had ever been raised or upheld before. Irested my head against a pillow or an arm, and felt easy.

　　In five minutes more the cloud of bewilderment dissolved: I knewquite well that I was in my own bed, and that the red glare was thenursery fire. It was night: a candle burnt on the table; Bessiestood at the bed-foot with a basin in her hand, and a gentleman sat ina chair near my pillow, leaning over me.

　　I felt an inexpressible relief, a soothing conviction of protectionand security, when I knew that there was a stranger in the room, anindividual not belonging to Gateshead, and not related to Mrs. Reed.Turning from Bessie (though her presence was far less obnoxious tome than that of Abbot, for instance, would have been), I scrutinisedthe face of the gentleman: I knew him; it was Mr. Lloyd, anapothecary, sometimes called in by Mrs. Reed when the servants wereailing: for herself and the children she employed a physician.

　　'Well, who am I?' he asked.

　　I pronounced his name, offering him at the same time my hand: hetook it, smiling and saying, 'We shall do very well by and by.' Thenhe laid me down, and addressing Bessie, charged her to be very carefulthat I was not disturbed during the night. Having given some furtherdirections, and intimated that he should call again the next day, hedeparted; to my grief: I felt so sheltered and befriended while he satin the chair near my pillow; and as he closed the door after him,all the room darkened and my heart again sank: inexpressible sadnessweighed it down.

　　'Do you feel as if you should sleep, Miss?' asked Bessie, rathersoftly.

　　Scarcely dared I answer her; for I feared the next sentence mightbe rough. 'I will try.'

　　'Would you like to drink, or could you eat anything?'

　　'No, thank you, Bessie.'

　　'Then I think I shall go to bed, for it is past twelve o'clock; butyou may call me if you want anything in the night.'

　　Wonderful civility this! It emboldened me to ask a question.

　　'Bessie, what is the matter with me? Am I ill?'

　　'You fell sick, I suppose, in the red-room with crying; you'll bebetter soon, no doubt.'

　　Bessie went into the housemaid's apartment, which was near. I heardher say-

　　'Sarah, come and sleep with me in the nursery; I daren't for mylife be alone with that poor child tonight: she might die; it's such astrange thing she should have that fit: I wonder if she sawanything. Missis was rather too hard.'

　　Sarah came back with her; they both went to bed; they werewhispering together for half an hour before they fell asleep. I caughtscraps of their conversation, from which I was able only toodistinctly to infer the main subject discussed.

　　'Something passed her, all dressed in white, and vanished'- 'Agreat black dog behind him'- 'Three loud raps on the chamber door'-'A light in the churchyard just over his grave,' etc., etc.

　　At last both slept: the fire and the candle went out. For me, thewatches of that long night passed in ghastly wakefulness; ear, eye,and mind were alike strained by dread: such dread as children only canfeel.

　　No severe or prolonged bodily illness followed this incident of thered-room; it only gave my nerves a shock of which I feel thereverberation to this day. Yes, Mrs. Reed, to you I owe some fearfulpangs of mental suffering, but I ought to forgive you, for you knewnot what you did: while rending my heart-strings, you thought you wereonly uprooting my bad propensities.

　　Next day, by noon, I was up and dressed, and sat wrapped in a shawlby the nursery hearth. I felt physically weak and broken down: butmy worse ailment was an unutterable wretchedness of mind: awretchedness which kept drawing from me silent tears; no sooner hadI wiped one salt drop from my cheek than another followed. Yet, Ithought, I ought to have been happy, for none of the Reeds were there,they were all gone out in the carriage with their mama. Abbot, too,was sewing in another room, and Bessie, as she moved hither andthither, putting away toys and arranging drawers, addressed to meevery now and then a word of unwonted kindness. This state of thingsshould have been to me a paradise of peace, accustomed as I was to alife of ceaseless reprimand and thankless fagging; but, in fact, myracked nerves were now in such a state that no calm could soothe,and no pleasure excite them agreeably.

　　Bessie had been down into the kitchen, and she brought up withher a tart on a certain brightly painted china plate, whose bird ofparadise, nestling in a wreath of convolvuli and rosebuds, had beenwont to stir in me a most enthusiastic sense of admiration; andwhich plate I had often petitioned to be allowed to take in my hand inorder to examine it more closely, but had always hitherto beendeemed unworthy of such a privilege. This precious vessel was nowplaced on my knee, and I was cordially invited to eat the circlet ofdelicate pastry upon it. Vain favour! coming, like most otherfavours long deferred and often wished for, too late! I could noteat the tart; and the plumage of the bird, the tints of the flowers,seemed strangely faded: I put both plate and tart away. Bessie askedif I would have a book: the word book acted as a transient stimulus,and I begged her to fetch Gulliver's Travels from the library. Thisbook I had again and again perused with delight. I considered it anarrative of facts, and discovered in it a vein of interest deeperthan what I found in fairy tales: for as to the elves, having soughtthem in vain among fox-glove leaves and bells, under mushrooms andbeneath the ground-ivy mantling old wall-nooks, I had at length madeup my mind to the sad truth, that they were all gone out of England tosome savage country where the woods were wilder and thicker, and thepopulation more scant; whereas, Lilliput and Brobdingnag being, inmy creed, solid parts of the earth's surface, I doubted not that Imight one day, by taking a long voyage, see with my own eyes thelittle fields, houses, and trees, the diminutive people, the tinycows, sheep, and birds of the one realm; and the corn-fields,forest-high, the mighty mastiffs, the monster cats, the tower-like menand women, of the other. Yet, when this cherished volume was nowplaced in my hand- when I turned over its leaves, and sought in itsmarvellous pictures the charm I had, till now, never failed to find-all was eerie and dreary; the giants were gaunt goblins, the pigmiesmalevolent and fearful imps, Gulliver a most desolate wanderer in mostdread and dangerous regions. I closed the book, which I dared nolonger peruse, and put it on the table, beside the untasted tart.

　　Bessie had now finished dusting and tidying the room, and havingwashed her hands, she opened a certain little drawer, full of splendidshreds of silk and satin, and began making a new bonnet forGeorgiana's doll. Meantime she sang: her song was-

　　'In the days when we were gipsying,

　　A long time ago.'

　　I had often heard the song before, and always with livelydelight; for Bessie had a sweet voice,- at least, I thought so. Butnow, though her voice was still sweet, I found in its melody anindescribable sadness. Sometimes, preoccupied with her work, shesang the refrain very low, very lingeringly; 'A long time ago' cameout like the saddest cadence of a funeral hymn. She passed intoanother ballad, this time a really doleful one.

　　'My feet they are sore, and my limbs they are weary;

　　Long is the way, and the mountains are wild;

　　Soon will the twilight close moonless and dreary

　　Over the path of the poor orphan child.

　　Why did they send me so far and so lonely,

　　Up where the moors spread and grey rocks are piled?

　　Men are hard-hearted, and kind angels only

　　Watch o'er the steps of a poor orphan child.

　　Yet distant and soft the night breeze is blowing,

　　Clouds there are none, and clear stars beam mild,

　　God, in His mercy, protection is showing,

　　Comfort and hope to the poor orphan child.

　　Ev'n should I fall o'er the broken bridge passing,

　　Or stray in the marshes, by false lights beguiled,

　　Still will my Father, with promise and blessing,

　　Take to His bosom the poor orphan child.

　　There is a thought that for strength should avail me,

　　Though both of shelter and kindred despoiled;

　　Heaven is a home, and a rest will not fail me;

　　God is a friend to the poor orphan child.'

　　'Come, Miss Jane, don't cry,' said Bessie as she finished. Shemight as well have said to the fire, 'don't burn!' but how could shedivine the morbid suffering to which I was a prey? In the course ofthe morning Mr. Lloyd came again.

　　'What, already up!' said he, as he entered the nursery. 'Well,nurse, how is she?'

　　Bessie answered that I was doing very well.

　　'Then she ought to look more cheerful. Come here, Mis Jane: yourname is Jane, is it not?'

　　'Yes, sir, Jane Eyre.'

　　'Well, you have been crying, Miss Jane Eyre; can you tell me whatabout? Have you any pain?'

　　'No, sir.'

　　'Oh! I daresay she is crying because she could not go out withMissis in the carriage,' interposed Bessie.

　　'Surely not! why, she is too old for such pettishness.'

　　I thought so too; and my self-esteem being wounded by the falsecharge, I answered promptly, 'I never cried for such a thing in mylife: I hate going out in the carriage. I cry because I am miserable.'

　　'Oh fie, Miss!' said Bessie.

　　The good apothecary appeared a little puzzled. I was standingbefore him; he fixed his eyes on me very steadily: his eyes were smalland grey; not very bright, but I daresay I should think them shrewdnow: he had a hard-featured yet good-natured looking face. Havingconsidered me at leisure, he said-

　　'What made you ill yesterday?'

　　'She had a fall,' said Bessie, again putting in her word.

　　'Fall! why, that is like a baby again! Can't she manage to walkat her age? She must be eight or nine years old.'

　　'I was knocked down,' was the blunt explanation, jerked out of meby another pang of mortified pride; 'but that did not make me ill,'I added; while Mr. Lloyd helped himself to a pinch of snuff.

　　As he was returning the box to his waistcoat pocket, a loud bellrang for the servants' dinner; he knew what it was. 'That's for you,nurse,' said he; 'you can go down; I'll give Miss Jane a lecturetill you come back.'

　　Bessie would rather have stayed, but she was obliged to go, becausepunctuality at meals was rigidly enforced at Gates-head Hall.

　　'The fall did not make you ill; what did, then?' pursued Mr.Lloyd when Bessie was gone.

　　'I was shut up in a room where there is a ghost till after dark.'
