87	Mrs. Taylor stood on the station platform and waved at the young woman and her son, who waved back at her as the train began to move again. Then she picked up her bag and walked along the platform to the street.
88	When she boarded a streetcar the motorman looked down at her and said," You look happy; you must have had a swell vacation."
89	She smiled at him. "I had a wonderful trip," she answered.


56	The crowd began pushing them from behind, and Mrs. Taylor picked up her suitcase in one hand and grasped Garry's harness with the other. Then, followed by Mrs. Rawlinson and the baby they climbed the set of iron stairs to the platform.
57	Mrs. Taylor's feet were aching after the long wait at the gates, but her face shone with happiness as she steered the small boy alongside the train. The boy's mother drew up to her, and they walked together to the day-coach steps where a trainman waited to help them aboard.
58	"You've got your hands full there, Granny," he said, picking up the little boy and depositing him in the vestibule of the car.
59	She was pleased that he mistook her for the children's grandmother, and she beamed at him, not attempting to correct his mistake.
60	Inside the coach she led the way to a pair of seats that faced each other at the end of the car, and dropped into one with a tired sigh. Then she held the baby while its mother took the harness off Garry and placed her small case and shopping bags on the luggage rack.
61	"Am I ever glad to get aboard!" Mrs. Rawlinson exclaimed. "I'd been dreading the wait at the station. Now I've only got to change trains in Montreal and I'll be all set."
62	"It's quite a job traveling with children," Mrs. Taylor sympathized. "Don't worry, I know. I've done enough of it in my day," she said with slight exaggeration.
63	Mrs . Rawlinson laid the baby on the seat beside her, before sitting back and relaxing against the cushions. The coach soon filled up, and several people eyed their double seat enviously. Mrs. Taylor was glad she had been able to get well up in the queue at the gates.
64	When the train started she moved over close to the window and pointed out to the little boy the buildings and streets they passed, and the tiny inconsequential people they were leaving behind them. Young Garry shouted excitedly, "Choo-Choo!" at every engine they passed in the yards.
65	The city looked hot and uncomfortable in the morning sun, and Mrs. Taylor was surprised that all the little ant-like people didn't simply jump on a train and get away from it. It was remarkable that the ones she could see walking the street were strangers to her now, as if there was no connection between them and the people on the train. They were a race apart, an earthbound race separated from herself by movement and time, and the sense of adventure of her and her fellows.
66	She picked out landmarks as the train gathered speed; the street she had lived on as a girl, now turned into industrial sites; the spinning mill where she had once worked; the soot-blackened park where she and Bert had walked so many years ago...
67	"We won't be getting into Montreal until supper time," Mrs. Rawlinson said from the opposite seat, intruding upon her memories.
''No."
69	"I'll bet you'll be glad to get there and see your grand-daughter?"
70	Mrs. Taylor shook her head. "I'm not going to Montreal today," she said sadly." I can't afford to go that far."
71	"But -but couldn't your son send you the fare?" asked the girl.
72	She had to protect Johnnie, who wasn't really mean, just forgetful. "Oh, he could, but I've never really cared to go that far," she lied.
73	"Well-well, where are you going then?" the young woman asked, her curiosity getting the best of her.
74	"Not very far. Just up the line a piece," Mrs. Taylor answered, smiling. "It's just a short trip."
75	The train seemed to flow across the underpasses marking the street. Soon the industrial areas were left behind, and they began rushing through the residential districts.
76	Mrs. Taylor was enthralled with the sight of the rows of houses as seen from the rear; yards waving with drying clothes, and every house having an individuality of its own. She only recognized some of the familiar streets after the train dad passed them, they looked so different when seen from her hurtling point of vantage.
77	In a few minutes the train began to slow down for an outlying station, and the conductor came along the car collecting tickets. When Mrs. Taylor handed him her small bit of paste-board, he asked, "Are you getting off here, Madam?"
78	"Yes, I am," Mrs. Taylor replied, colouring with embarrassment.
79	"Have you any luggage?"
80	She pointed to the suitcase at her feet, ashamed to face the stares of those who were watching her.
81	"Fine. I'll carry it off for you," the conductor said calmly as if old ladies took ten-cent train rides every day of the week.
82	She stood up then and said goodbye to the little boy, letting her hand rest for a long minute on his tousled head. She warned him to be a good boy and do what his mother told him.
83	" You must think I'm crazy just coming this far," she said to Mrs. Rawlinson." You see, I've wanted to take a trip for so long, and this was sort of-pretending."
84	The young woman shook the surprised look from her face. "No, I don't, Mrs. Taylor," she said." I wish you were coming all the way. I don't know what I'd have ever done without you to help me with Garry."
