Lesson 1
A Trip for Mrs. Taylor
Hugh Garner

　　Eugenie Grandet

　　by Honore de Balzac

　　Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley

　　DEDICATION

　　To Maria.

　　May your name, that of one whose portrait is the noblest ornament

　　of this work, lie on its opening pages like a branch of sacred

　　box, taken from an unknown tree, but sanctified by religion, and

　　kept ever fresh and green by pious hands to bless the house.De Balzac.

　　EUGENIE GRANDET

　　I

　　There are houses in certain provincial towns whose aspect inspiresmelancholy, akin to that called forth by sombre cloisters, drearymoorlands, or the desolation of ruins. Within these houses there is,perhaps, the silence of the cloister, the barrenness of moors, theskeleton of ruins; life and movement are so stagnant there that astranger might think them uninhabited, were it not that he encounterssuddenly the pale, cold glance of a motionless person, whose half-monastic face peers beyond the window-casing at the sound of anunaccustomed step.

　　Such elements of sadness formed the physiognomy, as it were, of adwelling-house in Saumur which stands at the end of the steep streetleading to the chateau in the upper part of the town. This street--nowlittle frequented, hot in summer, cold in winter, dark in certainsections--is remarkable for the resonance of its little pebblypavement, always clean and dry, for the narrowness of its tortuousroad-way, for the peaceful stillness of its houses, which belong tothe Old town and are over-topped by the ramparts. Houses threecenturies old are still solid, though built of wood, and their diversaspects add to the originality which commends this portion of Saumurto the attention of artists and antiquaries.

　　It is difficult to pass these houses without admiring the enormousoaken beams, their ends carved into fantastic figures, which crownwith a black bas-relief the lower floor of most of them. In one placethese transverse timbers are covered with slate and mark a bluish linealong the frail wall of a dwelling covered by a roof /en colombage/which bends beneath the weight of years, and whose rotting shinglesare twisted by the alternate action of sun and rain. In another placeblackened, worn-out window-sills, with delicate sculptures nowscarcely discernible, seem too weak to bear the brown clay pots fromwhich springs the heart's-ease or the rose-bush of some poor working-woman. Farther on are doors studded with enormous nails, where thegenius of our forefathers has traced domestic hieroglyphics, of whichthe meaning is now lost forever. Here a Protestant attested hisbelief; there a Leaguer cursed Henry IV.; elsewhere some bourgeois hascarved the insignia of his /noblesse de cloches/, symbols of his long-forgotten magisterial glory. The whole history of France is there.Next to a tottering house with roughly plastered walls, where anartisan enshrines his tools, rises the mansion of a country gentleman,on the stone arch of which above the door vestiges of armorialbearings may still be seen, battered by the many revolutions that haveshaken France since 1789. In this hilly street the ground-floors ofthe merchants are neither shops nor warehouses; lovers of the MiddleAges will here find the /ouvrouere/ of our forefathers in all itsnaive simplicity. These low rooms, which have no shop-frontage, noshow-windows, in fact no glass at all, are deep and dark and withoutinterior or exterior decoration. Their doors open in two parts, eachroughly iron-bound; the upper half is fastened back within the room,the lower half, fitted with a spring-bell, swings continually to andfro. Air and light reach the damp den within, either through the upperhalf of the door, or through an open space between the ceiling and alow front wall, breast-high, which is closed by solid shutters thatare taken down every morning, put up every evening, and held in placeby heavy iron bars.

　　This wall serves as a counter for the merchandise. No delusive displayis there; only samples of the business, whatever it may chance to be,--such, for instance, as three or four tubs full of codfish and salt,a few bundles of sail-cloth, cordage, copper wire hanging from thejoists above, iron hoops for casks ranged along the wall, or a fewpieces of cloth upon the shelves. Enter. A neat girl, glowing withyouth, wearing a white kerchief, her arms red and bare, drops herknitting and calls her father or her mother, one of whom comes forwardand sells you what you want, phlegmatically, civilly, or arrogantly,according to his or her individual character, whether it be a matterof two sous' or twenty thousand francs' worth of merchandise. You maysee a cooper, for instance, sitting in his doorway and twirling histhumbs as he talks with a neighbor. To all appearance he owns nothingmore than a few miserable boat-ribs and two or three bundles of laths;but below in the port his teeming wood-yard supplies all the cooperagetrade of Anjou. He knows to a plank how many casks are needed if thevintage is good. A hot season makes him rich, a rainy season ruinshim; in a single morning puncheons worth eleven francs have been knownto drop to six. In this country, as in Touraine, atmosphericvicissitudes control commercial life. Wine-growers, proprietors, wood-merchants, coopers, inn-keepers, mariners, all keep watch of the sun.They tremble when they go to bed lest they should hear in the morningof a frost in the night; they dread rain, wind, drought, and wantwater, heat, and clouds to suit their fancy. A perpetual duel goes onbetween the heavens and their terrestrial interests. The barometersmooths, saddens, or makes merry their countenances, turn and turnabout. From end to end of this street, formerly the Grand'Rue deSaumur, the words: "Here's golden weather," are passed from door todoor; or each man calls to his neighbor: "It rains louis," knowingwell what a sunbeam or the opportune rainfall is bringing him.On Saturdays after midday, in the fine season, not one sou's worth ofmerchandise can be bought from these worthy traders. Each has hisvineyard, his enclosure of fields, and all spend two days in thecountry. This being foreseen, and purchases, sales, and profitsprovided for, the merchants have ten or twelve hours to spend inparties of pleasure, in making observations, in criticisms, and incontinual spying. A housewife cannot buy a partridge without theneighbors asking the husband if it were cooked to a turn. A young girlnever puts her head near a window that she is not seen by idlinggroups in the street. Consciences are held in the light; and thehouses, dark, silent, impenetrable as they seem, hide no mysteries.Life is almost wholly in the open air; every household sits at its ownthreshold, breakfasts, dines, and quarrels there. No one can passalong the street without being examined; in fact formerly, when astranger entered a provincial town he was bantered and made game offrom door to door. From this came many good stories, and the nickname/copieux/, which was applied to the inhabitants of Angers, whoexcelled in such urban sarcasms.

　　The ancient mansions of the old town of Saumur are at the top of thishilly street, and were formerly occupied by the nobility of theneighborhood. The melancholy dwelling where the events of thefollowing history took place is one of these mansions,--venerablerelics of a century in which men and things bore the characteristicsof simplicity which French manners and customs are losing day by day.Follow the windings of the picturesque thoroughfare, whoseirregularities awaken recollections that plunge the mind mechanicallyinto reverie, and you will see a somewhat dark recess, in the centreof which is hidden the door of the house of Monsieur Grandet. It isimpossible to understand the force of this provincial expression--thehouse of Monsieur Grandet--without giving the biography of MonsieurGrandet himself.

　　Monsieur Grandet enjoyed a reputation in Saumur whose causes andeffects can never be fully understood by those who have not, at onetime or another, lived in the provinces. In 1789 Monsieur Grandet--still called by certain persons le Pere Grandet, though the number ofsuch old persons has perceptibly diminished--was a master-cooper, ableto read, write, and cipher. At the period when the French Republicoffered for sale the church property in the arrondissement of Saumur,the cooper, then forty years of age, had just married the daughter ofa rich wood-merchant. Supplied with the ready money of his own fortuneand his wife's /dot/, in all about two thousand louis-d'or, Grandetwent to the newly established "district," where, with the help of twohundred double louis given by his father-in-law to the surlyrepublican who presided over the sales of the national domain, heobtained for a song, legally if not legitimately, one of the finestvineyards in the arrondissement, an old abbey, and several farms. Theinhabitants of Saumur were so little revolutionary that they thoughtPere Grandet a bold man, a republican, and a patriot with a mind opento all the new ideas; though in point of fact it was open only tovineyards. He was appointed a member of the administration of Saumur,and his pacific influence made itself felt politically andcommercially. Politically, he protected the ci-devant nobles, andprevented, to the extent of his power, the sale of the lands andproperty of the /emigres/; commercially, he furnished the Republicanarmies with two or three thousand puncheons of white wine, and tookhis pay in splendid fields belonging to a community of women whoselands had been reserved for the last lot.

　　Under the Consulate Grandet became mayor, governed wisely, andharvested still better pickings. Under the Empire he was calledMonsieur Grandet. Napoleon, however, did not like republicans, andsuperseded Monsieur Grandet (who was supposed to have worn thePhrygian cap) by a man of his own surroundings, a future baron of theEmpire. Monsieur Grandet quitted office without regret. He hadconstructed in the interests of the town certain fine roads which ledto his own property; his house and lands, very advantageouslyassessed, paid moderate taxes; and since the registration of hisvarious estates, the vineyards, thanks to his constant care, hadbecome the "head of the country,"--a local term used to denote thosethat produced the finest quality of wine. He might have asked for thecross of the Legion of honor.

　　This event occurred in 1806. Monsieur Grandet was then fifty-sevenyears of age, his wife thirty-six, and an only daughter, the fruit oftheir legitimate love, was ten years old. Monsieur Grandet, whomProvidence no doubt desired to compensate for the loss of hismunicipal honors, inherited three fortunes in the course of this year,--that of Madame de la Gaudiniere, born de la Bertelliere, the motherof Madame Grandet; that of old Monsieur de la Bertelliere, hergrandfather; and, lastly, that of Madame Gentillet, her grandmother onthe mother's side: three inheritances, whose amount was not known toany one. The avarice of the deceased persons was so keen that for along time they had hoarded their money for the pleasure of secretlylooking at it. Old Monsieur de la Bertelliere called an investment anextravagance, and thought he got better interest from the sight of hisgold than from the profits of usury. The inhabitants of Saumurconsequently estimated his savings according to "the revenues of thesun's wealth," as they said.

　　Monsieur Grandet thus obtained that modern title of nobility which ourmania for equality can never rub out. He became the most imposingpersonage in the arrondissement. He worked a hundred acres ofvineyard, which in fruitful years yielded seven or eight hundredhogsheads of wine. He owned thirteen farms, an old abbey, whosewindows and arches he had walled up for the sake of economy,--ameasure which preserved them,--also a hundred and twenty-seven acresof meadow-land, where three thousand poplars, planted in 1793, grewand flourished; and finally, the house in which he lived. Such was hisvisible estate; as to his other property, only two persons could giveeven a vague guess at its value: one was Monsieur Cruchot, a notaryemployed in the usurious investments of Monsieur Grandet; the otherwas Monsieur des Grassins, the richest banker in Saumur, in whoseprofits Grandet had a certain covenanted and secret share.Although old Cruchot and Monsieur des Grassins were both gifted withthe deep discretion which wealth and trust beget in the provinces,they publicly testified so much respect to Monsieur Grandet thatobservers estimated the amount of his property by the obsequiousattention which they bestowed upon him. In all Saumur there was no onenot persuaded that Monsieur Grandet had a private treasure, somehiding-place full of louis, where he nightly took ineffable delight ingazing upon great masses of gold. Avaricious people gathered proof ofthis when they looked at the eyes of the good man, to which the yellowmetal seemed to have conveyed its tints. The glance of a manaccustomed to draw enormous interest from his capital acquires, likethat of the libertine, the gambler, or the sycophant, certainindefinable habits,--furtive, eager, mysterious movements, which neverescape the notice of his co-religionists. This secret language is in acertain way the freemasonry of the passions. Monsieur Grandet inspiredthe respectful esteem due to one who owed no man anything, who,skilful cooper and experienced wine-grower that he was, guessed withthe precision of an astronomer whether he ought to manufacture athousand puncheons for his vintage, or only five hundred, who neverfailed in any speculation, and always had casks for sale when caskswere worth more than the commodity that filled them, who could storehis whole vintage in his cellars and bide his time to put thepuncheons on the market at two hundred francs, when the littleproprietors had been forced to sell theirs for five louis. His famousvintage of 1811, judiciously stored and slowly disposed of, broughthim in more than two hundred and forty thousand francs.

　　Financially speaking, Monsieur Grandet was something between a tigerand a boa-constrictor. He could crouch and lie low, watch his prey along while, spring upon it, open his jaws, swallow a mass of louis,and then rest tranquilly like a snake in process of digestion,impassible, methodical, and cold. No one saw him pass without afeeling of admiration mingled with respect and fear; had not every manin Saumur felt the rending of those polished steel claws? For thisone, Maitre Cruchot had procured the money required for the purchaseof a domain, but at eleven per cent. For that one, Monsieur desGrassins discounted bills of exchange, but at a frightful deduction ofinterest. Few days ever passed that Monsieur Grandet's name was notmentioned either in the markets or in social conversations at theevening gatherings. To some the fortune of the old wine-grower was anobject of patriotic pride. More than one merchant, more than oneinnkeeper, said to strangers with a certain complacency: "Monsieur, wehave two or three millionaire establishments; but as for MonsieurGrandet, he does not himself know how much he is worth."

　　In 1816 the best reckoners in Saumur estimated the landed property ofthe worthy man at nearly four millions; but as, on an average, he hadmade yearly, from 1793 to 1817, a hundred thousand francs out of thatproperty, it was fair to presume that he possessed in actual money asum nearly equal to the value of his estate. So that when, after agame of boston or an evening discussion on the matter of vines, thetalk fell upon Monsieur Grandet, knowing people said: "Le PereGrandet? le Pere Grandet must have at least five or six millions.""You are cleverer than I am; I have never been able to find out theamount," answered Monsieur Cruchot or Monsieur des Grassins, wheneither chanced to overhear the remark.

　　If some Parisian mentioned Rothschild or Monsieur Lafitte, the peopleof Saumur asked if he were as rich as Monsieur Grandet. When theParisian, with a smile, tossed them a disdainful affirmative, theylooked at each other and shook their heads with an incredulous air. Solarge a fortune covered with a golden mantle all the actions of thisman. If in early days some peculiarities of his life gave occasion forlaughter or ridicule, laughter and ridicule had long since died away.His least important actions had the authority of results repeatedlyshown. His speech, his clothing, his gestures, the blinking of hiseyes, were law to the country-side, where every one, after studyinghim as a naturalist studies the result of instinct in the loweranimals, had come to understand the deep mute wisdom of his slightestactions.

　　"It will be a hard winter," said one; "Pere Grandet has put on his furgloves."

　　"Pere Grandet is buying quantities of staves; there will be plenty ofwine this year."

　　Monsieur Grandet never bought either bread or meat. His farmerssupplied him weekly with a sufficiency of capons, chickens, eggs,butter, and his tithe of wheat. He owned a mill; and the tenant wasbound, over and above his rent, to take a certain quantity of grainand return him the flour and bran. La Grande Nanon, his only servant,though she was no longer young, baked the bread of the householdherself every Saturday. Monsieur Grandet arranged with kitchen-gardeners who were his tenants to supply him with vegetables. As tofruits, he gathered such quantities that he sold the greater part inthe market. His fire-wood was cut from his own hedgerows or taken fromthe half-rotten old sheds which he built at the corners of his fields,and whose planks the farmers carted into town for him, all cut up, andobligingly stacked in his wood-house, receiving in return his thanks.His only known expenditures were for the consecrated bread, theclothing of his wife and daughter, the hire of their chairs in church,the wages of la Grand Nanon, the tinning of the saucepans, lights,taxes, repairs on his buildings, and the costs of his variousindustries. He had six hundred acres of woodland, lately purchased,which he induced a neighbor's keeper to watch, under the promise of anindemnity. After the acquisition of this property he ate game for thefirst time.

　　Monsieur Grandet's manners were very simple. He spoke little. Heusually expressed his meaning by short sententious phrases uttered ina soft voice. After the Revolution, the epoch at which he first cameinto notice, the good man stuttered in a wearisome way as soon as hewas required to speak at length or to maintain an argument. Thisstammering, the incoherence of his language, the flux of words inwhich he drowned his thought, his apparent lack of logic, attributedto defects of education, were in reality assumed, and will besufficiently explained by certain events in the following history.Four sentences, precise as algebraic formulas, sufficed him usually tograsp and solve all difficulties of life and commerce: "I don't know;I cannot; I will not; I will see about it." He never said yes, or no,and never committed himself to writing. If people talked to him helistened coldly, holding his chin in his right hand and resting hisright elbow in the back of his left hand, forming in his own mindopinions on all matters, from which he never receded. He reflectedlong before making any business agreement. When his opponent, aftercareful conversation, avowed the secret of his own purposes, confidentthat he had secured his listener's assent, Grandet answered: "I candecide nothing without consulting my wife." His wife, whom he hadreduced to a state of helpless slavery, was a useful screen to him inbusiness. He went nowhere among friends; he neither gave nor accepteddinners; he made no stir or noise, seeming to economize in everything,even movement. He never disturbed or disarranged the things of otherpeople, out of respect for the rights of property. Nevertheless, inspite of his soft voice, in spite of his circumspect bearing, thelanguage and habits of a coarse nature came to the surface, especiallyin his own home, where he controlled himself less than elsewhere.Physically, Grandet was a man five feet high, thick-set, square-built,with calves twelve inches in circumference, knotted knee-joints, andbroad shoulders; his face was round, tanned, and pitted by the small-pox; his chin was straight, his lips had no curves, his teeth werewhite; his eyes had that calm, devouring expression which peopleattribute to the basilisk; his forehead, full of transverse wrinkles,was not without certain significant protuberances; his yellow-grayishhair was said to be silver and gold by certain young people who didnot realize the impropriety of making a jest about Monsieur Grandet.His nose, thick at the end, bore a veined wen, which the common peoplesaid, not without reason, was full of malice. The whole countenanceshowed a dangerous cunning, an integrity without warmth, the egotismof a man long used to concentrate every feeling upon the enjoyments ofavarice and upon the only human being who was anything whatever tohim,--his daughter and sole heiress, Eugenie. Attitude, manners,bearing, everything about him, in short, testified to that belief inhimself which the habit of succeeding in all enterprises never failsto give to a man.

　　Thus, though his manners were unctuous and soft outwardly, MonsieurGrandet's nature was of iron. His dress never varied; and those whosaw him to-day saw him such as he had been since 1791. His stout shoeswere tied with leathern thongs; he wore, in all weathers, thickwoollen stockings, short breeches of coarse maroon cloth with silverbuckles, a velvet waistcoat, in alternate stripes of yellow and puce,buttoned squarely, a large maroon coat with wide flaps, a blackcravat, and a quaker's hat. His gloves, thick as those of a gendarme,lasted him twenty months; to preserve them, he always laid themmethodically on the brim of his hat in one particular spot. Saumurknew nothing further about this personage.

　　Only six individuals had a right of entrance to Monsieur Grandet'shouse. The most important of the first three was a nephew of MonsieurCruchot. Since his appointment as president of the Civil courts ofSaumur this young man had added the name of Bonfons to that ofCruchot. He now signed himself C. de Bonfons. Any litigant so ill-advised as to call him Monsieur Cruchot would soon be made to feel hisfolly in court. The magistrate protected those who called him Monsieurle president, but he favored with gracious smiles those who addressedhim as Monsieur de Bonfons. Monsieur le president was thirty-threeyears old, and possessed the estate of Bonfons (Boni Fontis), worthseven thousand francs a year; he expected to inherit the property ofhis uncle the notary and that of another uncle, the Abbe Cruchot, adignitary of the chapter of Saint-Martin de Tours, both of whom werethought to be very rich. These three Cruchots, backed by a goodlynumber of cousins, and allied to twenty families in the town, formed aparty, like the Medici in Florence; like the Medici, the Cruchots hadtheir Pazzi.

　　Madame des Grassins, mother of a son twenty-three years of age, cameassiduously to play cards with Madame Grandet, hoping to marry herdear Adolphe to Mademoiselle Eugenie. Monsieur des Grassins, thebanker, vigorously promoted the schemes of his wife by means of secretservices constantly rendered to the old miser, and always arrived intime upon the field of battle. The three des Grassins likewise hadtheir adherents, their cousins, their faithful allies. On the Cruchotside the abbe, the Talleyrand of the family, well backed-up by hisbrother the notary, sharply contested every inch of ground with hisfemale adversary, and tried to obtain the rich heiress for his nephewthe president.

　　This secret warfare between the Cruchots and des Grassins, the prizethereof being the hand in marriage of Eugenie Grandet, kept thevarious social circles of Saumur in violent agitation. WouldMademoiselle Grandet marry Monsieur le president or Monsieur Adolphedes Grassins? To this problem some replied that Monsieur Grandet wouldnever give his daughter to the one or to the other. The old cooper,eaten up with ambition, was looking, they said, for a peer of France,to whom an income of three hundred thousand francs would make all thepast, present, and future casks of the Grandets acceptable. Othersreplied that Monsieur and Madame des Grassins were nobles, andexceedingly rich; that Adolphe was a personable young fellow; and thatunless the old man had a nephew of the pope at his beck and call, sucha suitable alliance ought to satisfy a man who came from nothing,--aman whom Saumur remembered with an adze in his hand, and who had,moreover, worn the /bonnet rouge/. Certain wise heads called attentionto the fact that Monsieur Cruchot de Bonfons had the right of entry tothe house at all times, whereas his rival was received only onSundays. Others, however, maintained that Madame des Grassins was moreintimate with the women of the house of Grandet than the Cruchotswere, and could put into their minds certain ideas which would lead,sooner or later, to success. To this the former retorted that the AbbeCruchot was the most insinuating man in the world: pit a woman againsta monk, and the struggle was even. "It is diamond cut diamond," said aSaumur wit.

　　The oldest inhabitants, wiser than their fellows, declared that theGrandets knew better than to let the property go out of the family,and that Mademoiselle Eugenie Grandet of Saumur would be married tothe son of Monsieur Grandet of Paris, a wealthy wholesale wine-merchant. To this the Cruchotines and the Grassinists replied: "In thefirst place, the two brothers have seen each other only twice inthirty years; and next, Monsieur Grandet of Paris has ambitiousdesigns for his son. He is mayor of an arrondissement, a deputy,colonel of the National Guard, judge in the commercial courts; hedisowns the Grandets of Saumur, and means to ally himself with someducal family,--ducal under favor of Napoleon." In short, was thereanything not said of an heiress who was talked of through acircumference of fifty miles, and even in the public conveyances fromAngers to Blois, inclusively!

　　At the beginning of 1811, the Cruchotines won a signal advantage overthe Grassinists. The estate of Froidfond, remarkable for its park, itsmansion, its farms, streams, ponds, forests, and worth about threemillions, was put up for sale by the young Marquis de Froidfond, whowas obliged to liquidate his possessions. Maitre Cruchot, thepresident, and the abbe, aided by their adherents, were able toprevent the sale of the estate in little lots. The notary concluded abargain with the young man for the whole property, payable in gold,persuading him that suits without number would have to be broughtagainst the purchasers of small lots before he could get the money forthem; it was better, therefore, to sell the whole to Monsieur Grandet,who was solvent and able to pay for the estate in ready money. Thefine marquisate of Froidfond was accordingly conveyed down the gulletof Monsieur Grandet, who, to the great astonishment of Saumur, paidfor it, under proper discount, with the usual formalities.This affair echoed from Nantes to Orleans. Monsieur Grandet tookadvantage of a cart returning by way of Froidfond to go and see hischateau. Having cast a master's eye over the whole property, hereturned to Saumur, satisfied that he had invested his money at fiveper cent, and seized by the stupendous thought of extending andincreasing the marquisate of Froidfond by concentrating all hisproperty there. Then, to fill up his coffers, now nearly empty, heresolved to thin out his woods and his forests, and to sell off thepoplars in the meadows.

　　II

　　It is now easy to understand the full meaning of the term, "the houseof Monsieur Grandet,"--that cold, silent, pallid dwelling, standingabove the town and sheltered by the ruins of the ramparts. The twopillars and the arch, which made the porte-cochere on which the dooropened, were built, like the house itself, of tufa,--a white stonepeculiar to the shores of the Loire, and so soft that it lasts hardlymore than two centuries. Numberless irregular holes, capriciouslybored or eaten out by the inclemency of the weather, gave anappearance of the vermiculated stonework of French architecture to thearch and the side walls of this entrance, which bore some resemblanceto the gateway of a jail. Above the arch was a long bas-relief, inhard stone, representing the four seasons, the faces already crumblingaway and blackened. This bas-relief was surmounted by a projectingplinth, upon which a variety of chance growths had sprung up,--yellowpellitory, bindweed, convolvuli, nettles, plantain, and even a littlecherry-tree, already grown to some height.

　　The door of the archway was made of solid oak, brown, shrunken, andsplit in many places; though frail in appearance, it was firmly heldin place by a system of iron bolts arranged in symmetrical patterns. Asmall square grating, with close bars red with rust, filled up themiddle panel and made, as it were, a motive for the knocker, fastenedto it by a ring, which struck upon the grinning head of a huge nail.This knocker, of the oblong shape and kind which our ancestors called/jaquemart/, looked like a huge note of exclamation; an antiquary whoexamined it attentively might have found indications of the figure,essentially burlesque, which it once represented, and which long usagehad now effaced. Through this little grating--intended in olden timesfor the recognition of friends in times of civil war--inquisitivepersons could perceive, at the farther end of the dark and slimyvault, a few broken steps which led to a garden, picturesquely shut inby walls that were thick and damp, and through which oozed a moisturethat nourished tufts of sickly herbage. These walls were the ruins ofthe ramparts, under which ranged the gardens of several neighboringhouses.

　　The most important room on the ground-floor of the house was a largehall, entered directly from beneath the vault of the porte-cochere.Few people know the importance of a hall in the little towns of Anjou,Touraine, and Berry. The hall is at one and the same time antechamber,salon, office, boudoir, and dining-room; it is the theatre of domesticlife, the common living-room. There the barber of the neighborhoodcame, twice a year, to cut Monsieur Grandet's hair; there the farmers,the cure, the under-prefect, and the miller's boy came on business.This room, with two windows looking on the street, was entirely ofwood. Gray panels with ancient mouldings covered the walls from top tobottom; the ceiling showed all its beams, which were likewise paintedgray, while the space between them had been washed over in white, nowyellow with age. An old brass clock, inlaid with arabesques, adornedthe mantel of the ill-cut white stone chimney-piece, above which was agreenish mirror, whose edges, bevelled to show the thickness of theglass, reflected a thread of light the whole length of a gothic framein damascened steel-work. The two copper-gilt candelabra whichdecorated the corners of the chimney-piece served a double purpose: bytaking off the side-branches, each of which held a socket, the mainstem--which was fastened to a pedestal of bluish marble tipped withcopper--made a candlestick for one candle, which was sufficient forordinary occasions. The chairs, antique in shape, were covered withtapestry representing the fables of La Fontaine; it was necessary,however, to know that writer well to guess at the subjects, for thefaded colors and the figures, blurred by much darning, were difficultto distinguish.

　　At the four corners of the hall were closets, or rather buffets,surmounted by dirty shelves. An old card-table in marquetry, of whichthe upper part was a chess-board, stood in the space between the twowindows. Above this table was an oval barometer with a black borderenlivened with gilt bands, on which the flies had so licentiouslydisported themselves that the gilding had become problematical. On thepanel opposite to the chimney-piece were two portraits in pastel,supposed to represent the grandfather of Madame Grandet, old Monsieurde la Bertelliere, as a lieutenant in the French guard, and thedeceased Madame Gentillet in the guise of a shepherdess. The windowswere draped with curtains of red /gros de Tours/ held back by silkencords with ecclesiastical tassels. This luxurious decoration, littlein keeping with the habits of Monsieur Grandet, had been, togetherwith the steel pier-glass, the tapestries, and the buffets, which wereof rose-wood, included in the purchase of the house.

　　By the window nearest to the door stood a straw chair, whose legs wereraised on castors to lift its occupant, Madame Grandet, to a heightfrom which she could see the passers-by. A work-table of stainedcherry-wood filled up the embrasure, and the little armchair ofEugenie Grandet stood beside it. In this spot the lives had flowedpeacefully onward for fifteen years, in a round of constant work fromthe month of April to the month of November. On the first day of thelatter month they took their winter station by the chimney. Not untilthat day did Grandet permit a fire to be lighted; and on the thirty-first of March it was extinguished, without regard either to thechills of the early spring or to those of a wintry autumn. A foot-warmer, filled with embers from the kitchen fire, which la GrandeNanon contrived to save for them, enabled Madame and MademoiselleGrandet to bear the chilly mornings and evenings of April and October.Mother and daughter took charge of the family linen, and spent theirdays so conscientiously upon a labor properly that of working-women,that if Eugenie wished to embroider a collar for her mother she wasforced to take the time from sleep, and deceive her father to obtainthe necessary light. For a long time the miser had given out thetallow candle to his daughter and la Grande Nanon just as he gave outevery morning the bread and other necessaries for the dailyconsumption.

　　La Grande Nanon was perhaps the only human being capable of acceptingwillingly the despotism of her master. The whole town envied Monsieurand Madame Grandet the possession of her. La Grande Nanon, so calledon account of her height, which was five feet eight inches, had livedwith Monsieur Grandet for thirty-five years. Though she received onlysixty francs a year in wages, she was supposed to be one of therichest serving-women in Saumur. Those sixty francs, accumulatingthrough thirty-five years, had recently enabled her to invest fourthousand francs in an annuity with Maitre Cruchot. This result of herlong and persistent economy seemed gigantic. Every servant in thetown, seeing that the poor sexagenarian was sure of bread for her oldage, was jealous of her, and never thought of the hard slavery throughwhich it had been won.

　　At twenty-two years of age the poor girl had been unable to find asituation, so repulsive was her face to almost every one. Yet thefeeling was certainly unjust: the face would have been much admired onthe shoulders of a grenadier of the guard; but all things, so theysay, should be in keeping. Forced to leave a farm where she kept thecows, because the dwelling-house was burned down, she came to Saumurto find a place, full of the robust courage that shrinks from nolabor. Le Pere Grandet was at that time thinking of marriage and aboutto set up his household. He espied the girl, rejected as she was fromdoor to door. A good judge of corporeal strength in his trade as acooper, he guessed the work that might be got out of a female creatureshaped like a Hercules, as firm on her feet as an oak sixty years oldon its roots, strong in the hips, square in the back, with the handsof a cartman and an honesty as sound as her unblemished virtue.Neither the warts which adorned her martial visage, nor the red-bricktints of her skin, nor the sinewy arms, nor the ragged garments of laGrande Nanon, dismayed the cooper, who was at that time still of anage when the heart shudders. He fed, shod, and clothed the poor girl,gave her wages, and put her to work without treating her too roughly.Seeing herself thus welcomed, la Grande Nanon wept secretly tears ofjoy, and attached herself in all sincerity to her master, who fromthat day ruled her and worked her with feudal authority. Nanon dideverything. She cooked, she made the lye, she washed the linen in theLoire and brought it home on her shoulders; she got up early, she wentto bed late; she prepared the food of the vine-dressers during theharvest, kept watch upon the market-people, protected the property ofher master like a faithful dog, and even, full of blind confidence,obeyed without a murmur his most absurd exactions.

　　In the famous year of 1811, when the grapes were gathered withunheard-of difficulty, Grandet resolved to give Nanon his old watch,--the first present he had made her during twenty years of service.Though he turned over to her his old shoes (which fitted her), it isimpossible to consider that quarterly benefit as a gift, for the shoeswere always thoroughly worn-out. Necessity had made the poor girl soniggardly that Grandet had grown to love her as we love a dog, andNanon had let him fasten a spiked collar round her throat, whosespikes no longer pricked her. If Grandet cut the bread with rather toomuch parsimony, she made no complaint; she gaily shared the hygienicbenefits derived from the severe regime of the household, in which noone was ever ill. Nanon was, in fact, one of the family; she laughedwhen Grandet laughed, felt gloomy or chilly, warmed herself, andtoiled as he did. What pleasant compensations there were in suchequality! Never did the master have occasion to find fault with theservant for pilfering the grapes, nor for the plums and nectarineseaten under the trees. "Come, fall-to, Nanon!" he would say in yearswhen the branches bent under the fruit and the farmers were obliged togive it to the pigs.

　　To the poor peasant who in her youth had earned nothing but harshtreatment, to the pauper girl picked up by charity, Grandet'sambiguous laugh was like a sunbeam. Moreover, Nanon's simple heart andnarrow head could hold only one feeling and one idea. For thirty-fiveyears she had never ceased to see herself standing before the wood-yard of Monsieur Grandet, ragged and barefooted, and to hear him say:"What do you want, young one?" Her gratitude was ever new. SometimesGrandet, reflecting that the poor creature had never heard aflattering word, that she was ignorant of all the tender sentimentsinspired by women, that she might some day appear before the throne ofGod even more chaste than the Virgin Mary herself,--Grandet, struckwith pity, would say as he looked at her, "Poor Nanon!" Theexclamation was always followed by an undefinable look cast upon himin return by the old servant. The words, uttered from time to time,formed a chain of friendship that nothing ever parted, and to whicheach exclamation added a link. Such compassion arising in the heart ofthe miser, and accepted gratefully by the old spinster, had somethinginconceivably horrible about it. This cruel pity, recalling, as itdid, a thousand pleasures to the heart of the old cooper, was forNanon the sum total of happiness. Who does not likewise say, "PoorNanon!" God will recognize his angels by the inflexions of theirvoices and by their secret sighs.

　　There were very many households in Saumur where the servants werebetter treated, but where the masters received far less satisfactionin return. Thus it was often said: "What have the Grandets ever doneto make their Grande Nanon so attached to them? She would go throughfire and water for their sake!" Her kitchen, whose barred windowslooked into the court, was always clean, neat, cold,--a true miser'skitchen, where nothing went to waste. When Nanon had washed herdishes, locked up the remains of the dinner, and put out her fire, sheleft the kitchen, which was separated by a passage from the living-room, and went to spin hemp beside her masters. One tallow candlesufficed the family for the evening. The servant slept at the end ofthe passage in a species of closet lighted only by a fan-light. Herrobust health enabled her to live in this hole with impunity; thereshe could hear the slightest noise through the deep silence whichreigned night and day in that dreary house. Like a watch-dog, sheslept with one ear open, and took her rest with a mind alert.A description of the other parts of the dwelling will be foundconnected with the events of this history, though the foregoing sketchof the hall, where the whole luxury of the household appears, mayenable the reader to surmise the nakedness of the upper floors.In 1819, at the beginning of an evening in the middle of November, laGrande Nanon lighted the fire for the first time. The autumn had beenvery fine. This particular day was a fete-day well known to theCruchotines and the Grassinists. The six antagonists, armed at allpoints, were making ready to meet at the Grandets and surpass eachother in testimonials of friendship. That morning all Saumur had seenMadame and Mademoiselle Grandet, accompanied by Nanon, on their way tohear Mass at the parish church, and every one remembered that the daywas the anniversary of Mademoiselle Eugenie's birth. Calculating thehour at which the family dinner would be over, Maitre Cruchot, theAbbe Cruchot, and Monsieur C. de Bonfons hastened to arrive before thedes Grassins, and be the first to pay their compliments toMademoiselle Eugenie. All three brought enormous bouquets, gathered intheir little green-houses. The stalks of the flowers which thepresident intended to present were ingeniously wound round with awhite satin ribbon adorned with gold fringe. In the morning MonsieurGrandet, following his usual custom on the days that commemorated thebirth and the fete of Eugenie, went to her bedside and solemnlypresented her with his paternal gift,--which for the last thirteenyears had consisted regularly of a curious gold-piece. Madame Grandetgave her daughter a winter dress or a summer dress, as the case mightbe. These two dresses and the gold-pieces, of which she received twoothers on New Year's day and on her father's fete-day, gave Eugenie alittle revenue of a hundred crowns or thereabouts, which Grandet lovedto see her amass. Was it not putting his money from one strong-box toanother, and, as it were, training the parsimony of his heiress? fromwhom he sometimes demanded an account of her treasure (formerlyincreased by the gifts of the Bertellieres), saying: "It is to be yourmarriage dozen."

　　The "marriage dozen" is an old custom sacredly preserved and still inforce in many parts of central France. In Berry and in Anjou, when ayoung girl marries, her family, or that of the husband, must give hera purse, in which they place, according to their means, twelve pieces,or twelve dozen pieces, or twelve hundred pieces of gold. The poorestshepherd-girl never marries without her dozen, be it only a dozencoppers. They still tell in Issoudun of a certain "dozen" presented toa rich heiress, which contained a hundred and forty-four /portugaisesd'or/. Pope Clement VII., uncle of Catherine de' Medici, gave her whenhe married her to Henri II. a dozen antique gold medals of pricelessvalue.

　　During dinner the father, delighted to see his Eugenie looking well ina new gown, exclaimed: "As it is Eugenie's birthday let us have afire; it will be a good omen."

　　"Mademoiselle will be married this year, that's certain," said laGrande Nanon, carrying away the remains of the goose,--the pheasant oftradesmen.

　　"I don't see any one suitable for her in Saumur," said Madame Grandet,glancing at her husband with a timid look which, considering heryears, revealed the conjugal slavery under which the poor womanlanguished.

　　Grandet looked at his daughter and exclaimed gaily,--

　　"She is twenty-three years old to-day, the child; we must soon beginto think of it."

　　Eugenie and her mother silently exchanged a glance of intelligence.Madame Grandet was a dry, thin woman, as yellow as a quince, awkward,slow, one of those women who are born to be down-trodden. She had bigbones, a big nose, a big forehead, big eyes, and presented at firstsight a vague resemblance to those mealy fruits that have neithersavor nor succulence. Her teeth were black and few in number, hermouth was wrinkled, her chin long and pointed. She was an excellentwoman, a true la Bertelliere. L'abbe Cruchot found occasionalopportunity to tell her that she had not done ill; and she believedhim. Angelic sweetness, the resignation of an insect tortured bychildren, a rare piety, a good heart, an unalterable equanimity ofsoul, made her universally pitied and respected. Her husband nevergave her more than six francs at a time for her personal expenses.Ridiculous as it may seem, this woman, who by her own fortune and hervarious inheritances brought Pere Grandet more than three hundredthousand francs, had always felt so profoundly humiliated by herdependence and the slavery in which she lived, against which thegentleness of her spirit prevented her from revolting, that she hadnever asked for one penny or made a single remark on the deeds whichMaitre Cruchot brought for her signature. This foolish secret pride,this nobility of soul perpetually misunderstood and wounded byGrandet, ruled the whole conduct of the wife.

　　Madame Grandet was attired habitually in a gown of greenish levantinesilk, endeavoring to make it last nearly a year; with it she wore alarge kerchief of white cotton cloth, a bonnet made of plaited strawssewn together, and almost always a black-silk apron. As she seldomleft the house she wore out very few shoes. She never asked anythingfor herself. Grandet, seized with occasional remorse when heremembered how long a time had elapsed since he gave her the last sixfrancs, always stipulated for the "wife's pin-money" when he sold hisyearly vintage. The four or five louis presented by the Belgian or theDutchman who purchased the wine were the chief visible signs of MadameGrandet's annual revenues. But after she had received the five louis,her husband would often say to her, as though their purse were held incommon: "Can you lend me a few sous?" and the poor woman, glad to beable to do something for a man whom her confessor held up to her asher lord and master, returned him in the course of the winter severalcrowns out of the "pin-money." When Grandet drew from his pocket thefive-franc piece which he allowed monthly for the minor expenses,--thread, needles, and toilet,--of his daughter, he never failed to sayas he buttoned his breeches' pocket: "And you, mother, do you wantanything?"

　　"My friend," Madame Grandet would answer, moved by a sense of maternaldignity, "we will see about that later."

　　Wasted dignity! Grandet thought himself very generous to his wife.Philosophers who meet the like of Nanon, of Madame Grandet, ofEugenie, have surely a right to say that irony is at the bottom of theways of Providence.

　　After the dinner at which for the first time allusion had been made toEugenie's marriage, Nanon went to fetch a bottle of black-currantratafia from Monsieur Grandet's bed-chamber, and nearly fell as shecame down the stairs.

　　"You great stupid!" said her master; "are you going to tumble aboutlike other people, hey?"

　　"Monsieur, it was that step on your staircase which has given way.""She is right," said Madame Grandet; "it ought to have been mendedlong ago. Yesterday Eugenie nearly twisted her ankle."

　　"Here," said Grandet to Nanon, seeing that she looked quite pale, "asit is Eugenie's birthday, and you came near falling, take a littleglass of ratafia to set you right."

　　"Faith! I've earned it," said Nanon; "most people would have brokenthe bottle; but I'd sooner have broken my elbow holding it up high.""Poor Nanon!" said Grandet, filling a glass.

　　"Did you hurt yourself?" asked Eugenie, looking kindly at her."No, I didn't fall; I threw myself back on my haunches."

　　"Well! as it is Eugenie's birthday," said Grandet, "I'll have the stepmended. You people don't know how to set your foot in the corner wherethe wood is still firm."

　　Grandet took the candle, leaving his wife, daughter, and servantwithout any other light than that from the hearth, where the flameswere lively, and went into the bakehouse to fetch planks, nails, andtools.

　　"Can I help you?" cried Nanon, hearing him hammer on the stairs."No, no! I'm an old hand at it," answered the former cooper.At the moment when Grandet was mending his worm-eaten staircase andwhistling with all his might, in remembrance of the days of his youth,the three Cruchots knocked at the door.

　　"Is it you, Monsieur Cruchot?" asked Nanon, peeping through the littlegrating.

　　"Yes," answered the president.

　　Nanon opened the door, and the light from the hearth, reflected on theceiling, enabled the three Cruchots to find their way into the room."Ha! you've come a-greeting," said Nanon, smelling the flowers."Excuse me, messieurs," cried Grandet, recognizing their voices; "I'llbe with you in a moment. I'm not proud; I am patching up a step on mystaircase."

　　"Go on, go on, Monsieur Grandet; a man's house is his castle," saidthe president sententiously.

　　Madame and Mademoiselle Grandet rose. The president, profiting by thedarkness, said to Eugenie:

　　"Will you permit me, mademoiselle, to wish you, on this the day ofyour birth, a series of happy years and the continuance of the healthwhich you now enjoy?"

　　He offered her a huge bouquet of choice flowers which were rare inSaumur; then, taking the heiress by the elbows, he kissed her on eachside of her neck with a complacency that made her blush. Thepresident, who looked like a rusty iron nail, felt that his courtshipwas progressing.

　　"Don't stand on ceremony," said Grandet, entering. "How well you dothings on fete-days, Monsieur le president!"

　　"When it concerns mademoiselle," said the abbe, armed with his ownbouquet, "every day is a fete-day for my nephew."

　　The abbe kissed Eugenie's hand. As for Maitre Cruchot, he boldlykissed her on both cheeks, remarking: "How we sprout up, to be sure!Every year is twelve months."

　　As he replaced the candlestick beside the clock, Grandet, who neverforgot his own jokes, and repeated them to satiety when he thoughtthem funny, said,--

　　"As this is Eugenie's birthday let us illuminate."

　　He carefully took off the branches of the candelabra, put a socket oneach pedestal, took from Nanon a new tallow candle with paper twistedround the end of it, put it into the hollow, made it firm, lit it, andthen sat down beside his wife, looking alternately at his friends, hisdaughter, and the two candles. The Abbe Cruchot, a plump, puffy littleman, with a red wig plastered down and a face like an old femalegambler, said as he stretched out his feet, well shod in stout shoeswith silver buckles: "The des Grassins have not come?"

　　"Not yet," said Grandet.

　　"But are they coming?" asked the old notary, twisting his face, whichhad as many holes as a collander, into a queer grimace.

　　"I think so," answered Madame Grandet.

　　"Are your vintages all finished?" said Monsieur de Bonfons to Grandet."Yes, all of them," said the old man, rising to walk up and down theroom, his chest swelling with pride as he said the words, "all ofthem." Through the door of the passage which led to the kitchen he sawla Grande Nanon sitting beside her fire with a candle and preparing tospin there, so as not to intrude among the guests.

　　"Nanon," he said, going into the passage, "put out that fire and thatcandle, and come and sit with us. Pardieu! the hall is big enough forall."

　　"But monsieur, you are to have the great people."

　　"Are not you as good as they? They are descended from Adam, and so areyou."

　　Grandet came back to the president and said,--

　　"Have you sold your vintage?"

　　"No, not I; I shall keep it. If the wine is good this year, it will bebetter two years hence. The proprietors, you know, have made anagreement to keep up the price; and this year the Belgians won't getthe better of us. Suppose they are sent off empty-handed for once,faith! they'll come back."

　　"Yes, but let us mind what we are about," said Grandet in a tone whichmade the president tremble.

　　"Is he driving some bargain?" thought Cruchot.

　　At this moment the knocker announced the des Grassins family, andtheir arrival interrupted a conversation which had begun betweenMadame Grandet and the abbe.

　　Madame des Grassins was one of those lively, plump little women, withpink-and-white skins, who, thanks to the claustral calm of theprovinces and the habits of a virtuous life, keep their youth untilthey are past forty. She was like the last rose of autumn,--pleasantto the eye, though the petals have a certain frostiness, and theirperfume is slight. She dressed well, got her fashions from Paris, setthe tone to Saumur, and gave parties. Her husband, formerly aquartermaster in the Imperial guard, who had been desperately woundedat Austerlitz, and had since retired, still retained, in spite of hisrespect for Grandet, the seeming frankness of an old soldier."Good evening, Grandet," he said, holding out his hand and affecting asort of superiority, with which he always crushed the Cruchots."Mademoiselle," he added, turning to Eugenie, after bowing to MadameGrandet, "you are always beautiful and good, and truly I do not knowwhat to wish you." So saying, he offered her a little box which hisservant had brought and which contained a Cape heather,--a flowerlately imported into Europe and very rare.

　　Madame des Grassins kissed Eugenie very affectionately, pressed herhand, and said: "Adolphe wishes to make you my little offering."A tall, blond young man, pale and slight, with tolerable manners andseemingly rather shy, although he had just spent eight or ten thousandfrancs over his allowance in Paris, where he had been sent to studylaw, now came forward and kissed Eugenie on both cheeks, offering hera workbox with utensils in silver-gilt,--mere show-case trumpery, inspite of the monogram E.G. in gothic letters rather well engraved,which belonged properly to something in better taste. As she openedit, Eugenie experienced one of those unexpected and perfect delightswhich make a young girl blush and quiver and tremble with pleasure.She turned her eyes to her father as if to ask permission to acceptit, and Monsieur Grandet replied: "Take it, my daughter," in a tonewhich would have made an actor illustrious.

　　The three Cruchots felt crushed as they saw the joyous, animated lookcast upon Adolphe des Grassins by the heiress, to whom such richeswere unheard-of. Monsieur des Grassins offered Grandet a pinch ofsnuff, took one himself, shook off the grains as they fell on theribbon of the Legion of honor which was attached to the button-hole ofhis blue surtout; then he looked at the Cruchots with an air thatseemed to say, "Parry that thrust if you can!" Madame des Grassinscast her eyes on the blue vases which held the Cruchot bouquets,looking at the enemy's gifts with the pretended interest of asatirical woman. At this delicate juncture the Abbe Cruchot left thecompany seated in a circle round the fire and joined Grandet at thelower end of the hall. As the two men reached the embrasure of thefarthest window the priest said in the miser's ear: "Those peoplethrow money out of the windows."

　　"What does that matter if it gets into my cellar?" retorted the oldwine-grower.

　　"If you want to give gilt scissors to your daughter, you have themeans," said the abbe.

　　"I give her something better than scissors," answered Grandet."My nephew is a blockhead," thought the abbe as he looked at thepresident, whose rumpled hair added to the ill grace of his browncountenance. "Couldn't he have found some little trifle which costmoney?"

　　"We will join you at cards, Madame Grandet," said Madame des Grassins."We might have two tables, as we are all here."

　　"As it is Eugenie's birthday you had better play loto all together,"said Pere Grandet: "the two young ones can join"; and the old cooper,who never played any game, motioned to his daughter and Adolphe."Come, Nanon, set the tables."

　　"We will help you, Mademoiselle Nanon," said Madame des Grassinsgaily, quite joyous at the joy she had given Eugenie.

　　"I have never in my life been so pleased," the heiress said to her; "Ihave never seen anything so pretty."

　　"Adolphe brought it from Paris, and he chose it," Madame des Grassinswhispered in her ear.

　　"Go on! go on! damned intriguing thing!" thought the president. "Ifyou ever have a suit in court, you or your husband, it shall go hardwith you."

　　The notary, sitting in his corner, looked calmly at the abbe, sayingto himself: "The des Grassins may do what they like; my property andmy brother's and that of my nephew amount in all to eleven hundredthousand francs. The des Grassins, at the most, have not half that;besides, they have a daughter. They may give what presents they like;heiress and presents too will be ours one of these days."At half-past eight in the evening the two card-tables were set out.Madame des Grassins succeeded in putting her son beside Eugenie. Theactors in this scene, so full of interest, commonplace as it seems,were provided with bits of pasteboard striped in many colors andnumbered, and with counters of blue glass, and they appeared to belistening to the jokes of the notary, who never drew a number withoutmaking a remark, while in fact they were all thinking of MonsieurGrandet's millions. The old cooper, with inward self-conceit, wascontemplating the pink feathers and the fresh toilet of Madame desGrassins, the martial head of the banker, the faces of Adolphe, thepresident, the abbe, and the notary, saying to himself:--"They are all after my money. Hey! neither the one nor the other shallhave my daughter; but they are useful--useful as harpoons to fishwith."

　　This family gaiety in the old gray room dimly lighted by two tallowcandles; this laughter, accompanied by the whirr of Nanon's spinning-wheel, sincere only upon the lips of Eugenie or her mother; thistriviality mingled with important interests; this young girl, who,like certain birds made victims of the price put upon them, was nowlured and trapped by proofs of friendship of which she was the dupe,--all these things contributed to make the scene a melancholy comedy. Isit not, moreover, a drama of all times and all places, though herebrought down to its simplest expression? The figure of Grandet,playing his own game with the false friendship of the two families andgetting enormous profits from it, dominates the scene and throws lightupon it. The modern god,--the only god in whom faith is preserved,--money, is here, in all its power, manifested in a single countenance.The tender sentiments of life hold here but a secondary place; onlythe three pure, simple hearts of Nanon, of Eugenie, and of her motherwere inspired by them. And how much of ignorance there was in thesimplicity of these poor women! Eugenie and her mother knew nothing ofGrandet's wealth; they could only estimate the things of life by theglimmer of their pale ideas, and they neither valued nor despisedmoney, because they were accustomed to do without it. Their feelings,bruised, though they did not know it, but ever-living, were the secretspring of their existence, and made them curious exceptions in themidst of these other people whose lives were purely material.Frightful condition of the human race! there is no one of its joysthat does not come from some species of ignorance.

　　At the moment when Madame Grandet had won a loto of sixteen sous,--thelargest ever pooled in that house,--and while la Grande Nanon waslaughing with delight as she watched madame pocketing her riches, theknocker resounded on the house-door with such a noise that the womenall jumped in their chairs.

　　"There is no man in Saumur who would knock like that," said thenotary.

　　"How can they bang in that way!" exclaimed Nanon; "do they want tobreak in the door?"

　　"Who the devil is it?" cried Grandet.

　　III

　　Nanon took one of the candles and went to open the door, followed byher master.

　　"Grandet! Grandet!" cried his wife, moved by a sudden impulse of fear,and running to the door of the room.

　　All the players looked at each other.

　　"Suppose we all go?" said Monsieur des Grassins; "that knock strikesme as evil-intentioned."

　　Hardly was Monsieur des Grassins allowed to see the figure of a youngman, accompanied by a porter from the coach-office carrying two largetrunks and dragging a carpet-bag after him, than Monsieur Grandetturned roughly on his wife and said,--

　　"Madame Grandet, go back to your loto; leave me to speak withmonsieur."

　　Then he pulled the door quickly to, and the excited players returnedto their seats, but did not continue the game.

　　"Is it any one belonging to Saumur, Monsieur des Grassins?" asked hiswife.

　　"No, it is a traveller."

　　"He must have come from Paris."

　　"Just so," said the notary, pulling out his watch, which was twoinches thick and looked like a Dutch man-of-war; "it's nine o'clock;the diligence of the Grand Bureau is never late."

　　"Is the gentleman young?" inquired the Abbe Cruchot.

　　"Yes," answered Monsieur des Grassins, "and he has brought luggagewhich must weigh nearly three tons."

　　"Nanon does not come back," said Eugenie.

　　"It must be one of your relations," remarked the president."Let us go on with our game," said Madame Grandet gently. "I know fromMonsieur Grandet's tone of voice that he is annoyed; perhaps he wouldnot like to find us talking of his affairs."

　　"Mademoiselle," said Adolphe to his neighbor, "it is no doubt yourcousin Grandet,--a very good-looking young man; I met him at the ballof Monsieur de Nucingen." Adolphe did not go on, for his mother trodon his toes; and then, asking him aloud for two sous to put on herstake, she whispered: "Will you hold your tongue, you great goose!"At this moment Grandet returned, without la Grande Nanon, whose steps,together with those of the porter, echoed up the staircase; and he wasfollowed by the traveller who had excited such curiosity and so filledthe lively imaginations of those present that his arrival at thisdwelling, and his sudden fall into the midst of this assembly, canonly be likened to that of a snail into a beehive, or the introductionof a peacock into some village poultry-yard.

　　"Sit down near the fire," said Grandet.

　　Before seating himself, the young stranger saluted the assembledcompany very gracefully. The men rose to answer by a courteousinclination, and the women made a ceremonious bow.

　　"You are cold, no doubt, monsieur," said Madame Grandet; "you have,perhaps, travelled from--"

　　"Just like all women!" said the old wine-grower, looking up from aletter he was reading. "Do let monsieur rest himself!"

　　"But, father, perhaps monsieur would like to take something," saidEugenie.

　　"He has got a tongue," said the old man sternly.

　　The stranger was the only person surprised by this scene; all theothers were well-used to the despotic ways of the master. However,after the two questions and the two replies had been exchanged, thenewcomer rose, turned his back towards the fire, lifted one foot so asto warm the sole of its boot, and said to Eugenie,--

　　"Thank you, my cousin, but I dined at Tours. And," he added, lookingat Grandet, "I need nothing; I am not even tired."

　　"Monsieur has come from the capital?" asked Madame des Grassins.Monsieur Charles,--such was the name of the son of Monsieur Grandet ofParis,--hearing himself addressed, took a little eye-glass, suspendedby a chain from his neck, applied it to his right eye to examine whatwas on the table, and also the persons sitting round it. He ogledMadame des Grassins with much impertinence, and said to her, after hehad observed all he wished,--

　　"Yes, madame. You are playing at loto, aunt," he added. "Do not let meinterrupt you, I beg; go on with your game: it is too amusing toleave."

　　"I was certain it was the cousin," thought Madame des Grassins,casting repeated glances at him.

　　"Forty-seven!" cried the old abbe. "Mark it down, Madame des Grassins.Isn't that your number?"

　　Monsieur des Grassins put a counter on his wife's card, who satwatching first the cousin from Paris and then Eugenie, withoutthinking of her loto, a prey to mournful presentiments. From time totime the young the heiress glanced furtively at her cousin, and thebanker's wife easily detected a /crescendo/ of surprise and curiosityin her mind.

　　Monsieur Charles Grandet, a handsome young man of twenty-two,presented at this moment a singular contrast to the worthyprovincials, who, considerably disgusted by his aristocratic manners,were all studying him with sarcastic intent. This needs anexplanation. At twenty-two, young people are still so near childhoodthat they often conduct themselves childishly. In all probability, outof every hundred of them fully ninety-nine would have behavedprecisely as Monsieur Charles Grandet was now behaving.

　　Some days earlier than this his father had told him to go and spendseveral months with his uncle at Saumur. Perhaps Monsieur Grandet wasthinking of Eugenie. Charles, sent for the first time in his life intothe provinces, took a fancy to make his appearance with thesuperiority of a man of fashion, to reduce the whole arrondissement todespair by his luxury, and to make his visit an epoch, importing intothose country regions all the refinements of Parisian life. In short,to explain it in one word, he mean to pass more time at Saumur inbrushing his nails than he ever thought of doing in Paris, and toassume the extra nicety and elegance of dress which a young man offashion often lays aside for a certain negligence which in itself isnot devoid of grace. Charles therefore brought with him a completehunting-costume, the finest gun, the best hunting-knife in theprettiest sheath to be found in all Paris. He brought his wholecollection of waistcoats. They were of all kinds,--gray, black, white,scarabaeus-colored: some were shot with gold, some spangled, some/chined/; some were double-breasted and crossed like a shawl, otherswere straight in the collar; some had turned-over collars, somebuttoned up to the top with gilt buttons. He brought every variety ofcollar and cravat in fashion at that epoch. He brought two ofBuisson's coats and all his finest linen He brought his pretty goldtoilet-set,--a present from his mother. He brought all his dandyknick-knacks, not forgetting a ravishing little desk presented to himby the most amiable of women,--amiable for him, at least,--a fine ladywhom he called Annette and who at this moment was travelling,matrimonially and wearily, in Scotland, a victim to certain suspicionswhich required a passing sacrifice of happiness; in the desk was muchpretty note-paper on which to write to her once a fortnight.In short, it was as complete a cargo of Parisian frivolities as it waspossible for him to get together,--a collection of all the implementsof husbandry with which the youth of leisure tills his life, from thelittle whip which helps to begin a duel, to the handsomely chasedpistols which end it. His father having told him to travel alone andmodestly, he had taken the coupe of the diligence all to himself,rather pleased at not having to damage a delightful travelling-carriage ordered for a journey on which he was to meet his Annette,the great lady who, etc.,--whom he intended to rejoin at Baden in thefollowing June. Charles expected to meet scores of people at hisuncle's house, to hunt in his uncle's forests,--to live, in short, theusual chateau life; he did not know that his uncle was in Saumur, andhad only inquired about him incidentally when asking the way toFroidfond. Hearing that he was in town, he supposed that he shouldfind him in a suitable mansion.

　　In order that he might make a becoming first appearance before hisuncle either at Saumur or at Froidfond, he had put on his most eleganttravelling attire, simple yet exquisite,--"adorable," to use the wordwhich in those days summed up the special perfections of a man or athing. At Tours a hairdresser had re-curled his beautiful chestnutlocks; there he changed his linen and put on a black satin cravat,which, combined with a round shirt-collar, framed his fair and smilingcountenance agreeably. A travelling great-coat, only half buttoned up,nipped in his waist and disclosed a cashmere waistcoat crossed infront, beneath which was another waistcoat of white material. Hiswatch, negligently slipped into a pocket, was fastened by a short goldchain to a buttonhole. His gray trousers, buttoned up at the sides,were set off at the seams with patterns of black silk embroidery. Hegracefully twirled a cane, whose chased gold knob did not mar thefreshness of his gray gloves. And to complete all, his cap was inexcellent taste. None but a Parisian, and a Parisian of the upperspheres, could thus array himself without appearing ridiculous; noneother could give the harmony of self-conceit to all these fopperies,which were carried off, however, with a dashing air,--the air of ayoung man who has fine pistols, a sure aim, and Annette.

　　Now if you wish to understand the mutual amazement of the provincialparty and the young Parisian; if you would clearly see the brilliancewhich the traveller's elegance cast among the gray shadows of the roomand upon the faces of this family group,--endeavor to picture to yourminds the Cruchots. All three took snuff, and had long ceased torepress the habit of snivelling or to remove the brown blotches whichstrewed the frills of their dingy shirts and the yellowing creases oftheir crumpled collars. Their flabby cravats were twisted into ropesas soon as they wound them about their throats. The enormous quantityof linen which allowed these people to have their clothing washed onlyonce in six months, and to keep it during that time in the depths oftheir closets, also enabled time to lay its grimy and decaying stainsupon it. There was perfect unison of ill-grace and senility aboutthem; their faces, as faded as their threadbare coats, as creased astheir trousers, were worn-out, shrivelled-up, and puckered. As for theothers, the general negligence of their dress, which was incompleteand wanting in freshness,--like the toilet of all country places,where insensibly people cease to dress for others and come to thinkseriously of the price of a pair of gloves,--was in keeping with thenegligence of the Cruchots. A horror of fashion was the only point onwhich the Grassinists and the Cruchotines agreed.

　　When the Parisian took up his eye-glass to examine the strangeaccessories of this dwelling,--the joists of the ceiling, the color ofthe woodwork, and the specks which the flies had left there insufficient number to punctuate the "Moniteur" and the "Encyclopaediaof Sciences,"--the loto-players lifted their noses and looked at himwith as much curiosity as they might have felt about a giraffe.Monsieur des Grassins and his son, to whom the appearance of a man offashion was not wholly unknown, were nevertheless as much astonishedas their neighbors, whether it was that they fell under theindefinable influence of the general feeling, or that they reallyshared it as with satirical glances they seemed to say to theircompatriots,--

　　"That is what you see in Paris!"

　　They were able to examine Charles at their leisure without fearing todisplease the master of the house. Grandet was absorbed in the longletter which he held in his hand; and to read it he had taken the onlycandle upon the card-table, paying no heed to his guests or theirpleasure. Eugenie, to whom such a type of perfection, whether of dressor of person, was absolutely unknown, thought she beheld in her cousina being descended from seraphic spheres. She inhaled with delight thefragrance wafted from the graceful curls of that brilliant head. Shewould have liked to touch the soft kid of the delicate gloves. Sheenvied Charles his small hands, his complexion, the freshness andrefinement of his features. In short,--if it is possible to sum up theeffect this elegant being produced upon an ignorant young girlperpetually employed in darning stockings or in mending her father'sclothes, and whose life flowed on beneath these unclean rafters,seeing none but occasional passers along the silent street,--thisvision of her cousin roused in her soul an emotion of delicate desirelike that inspired in a young man by the fanciful pictures of womendrawn by Westall for the English "Keepsakes," and that engraved by theFindens with so clever a tool that we fear, as we breathe upon thepaper, that the celestial apparitions may be wafted away. Charles drewfrom his pocket a handkerchief embroidered by the great lady nowtravelling in Scotland. As Eugenie saw this pretty piece of work, donein the vacant hours which were lost to love, she looked at her cousinto see if it were possible that he meant to make use of it. Themanners of the young man, his gestures, the way in which he took uphis eye-glass, his affected superciliousness, his contemptuous glanceat the coffer which had just given so much pleasure to the richheiress, and which he evidently regarded as without value, or even asridiculous,--all these things, which shocked the Cruchots and the desGrassins, pleased Eugenie so deeply that before she slept she dreamedlong dreams of her phoenix cousin.

　　The loto-numbers were drawn very slowly, and presently the game camesuddenly to an end. La Grand Nanon entered and said aloud: "Madame, Iwant the sheets for monsieur's bed."

　　Madame Grandet followed her out. Madame des Grassins said in a lowvoice: "Let us keep our sous and stop playing." Each took his or hertwo sous from the chipped saucer in which they had been put; then theparty moved in a body toward the fire.

　　"Have you finished your game?" said Grandet, without looking up fromhis letter.

　　"Yes, yes!" replied Madame des Grassins, taking a seat near Charles.Eugenie, prompted by a thought often born in the heart of a young girlwhen sentiment enters it for the first time, left the room to go andhelp her mother and Nanon. Had an able confessor then questioned hershe would, no doubt, have avowed to him that she thought neither ofher mother nor of Nanon, but was pricked by a poignant desire to lookafter her cousin's room and concern herself with her cousin; to supplywhat might be needed, to remedy any forgetfulness, to see that all wasdone to make it, as far as possible, suitable and elegant; and, infact, she arrived in time to prove to her mother and Nanon thateverything still remained to be done. She put into Nanon's head thenotion of passing a warming-pan between the sheets. She herselfcovered the old table with a cloth and requested Nanon to change itevery morning; she convinced her mother that it was necessary to lighta good fire, and persuaded Nanon to bring up a great pile of wood intothe corridor without saying anything to her father. She ran to get,from one of the corner-shelves of the hall, a tray of old lacquerwhich was part of the inheritance of the late Monsieur de laBertelliere, catching up at the same time a six-sided crystal goblet,a little tarnished gilt spoon, an antique flask engraved with cupids,all of which she put triumphantly on the corner of her cousin'schimney-piece. More ideas surged through her head in one quarter of anhour than she had ever had since she came into the world."Mamma," she said, "my cousin will never bear the smell of a tallowcandle; suppose we buy a wax one?" And she darted, swift as a bird, toget the five-franc piece which she had just received for her monthlyexpenses. "Here, Nanon," she cried, "quick!"

　　"What will your father say?" This terrible remonstrance was uttered byMadame Grandet as she beheld her daughter armed with an old Sevressugar-basin which Grandet had brought home from the chateau ofFroidfond. "And where will you get the sugar? Are you crazy?""Mamma, Nanon can buy some sugar as well as the candle."

　　"But your father?"

　　"Surely his nephew ought not to go without a glass of /eau sucree/?Besides, he will not notice it."

　　"Your father sees everything," said Madame Grandet, shaking her head.Nanon hesitated; she knew her master.

　　"Come, Nanon, go,--because it is my birthday."

　　Nanon gave a loud laugh as she heard the first little jest her youngmistress had ever made, and then obeyed her.

　　While Eugenie and her mother were trying to embellish the bedroomassigned by Monsieur Grandet for his nephew, Charles himself was theobject of Madame des Grassins' attentions; to all appearances she wassetting her cap at him.

　　"You are very courageous, monsieur," she said to the young dandy, "toleave the pleasures of the capital at this season and take up yourabode in Saumur. But if we do not frighten you away, you will findthere are some amusements even here."

　　She threw him the ogling glance of the provinces, where women put somuch prudence and reserve into their eyes that they impart to them theprudish concupiscence peculiar to certain ecclesiastics to whom allpleasure is either a theft or an error. Charles was so completely outof his element in this abode, and so far from the vast chateau and thesumptuous life with which his fancy had endowed his uncle, that as helooked at Madame des Grassins he perceived a dim likeness to Parisianfaces. He gracefully responded to the species of invitation addressedto him, and began very naturally a conversation, in which Madame desGrassins gradually lowered her voice so as to bring it into harmonywith the nature of the confidences she was making. With her, as withCharles, there was the need of conference; so after a few momentsspent in coquettish phrases and a little serious jesting, the cleverprovincial said, thinking herself unheard by the others, who werediscussing the sale of wines which at that season filled the heads ofevery one in Saumur,--

　　"Monsieur if you will do us the honor to come and see us, you willgive as much pleasure to my husband as to myself. Our salon is theonly one in Saumur where you will find the higher business circlesmingling with the nobility. We belong to both societies, who meet atour house simply because they find it amusing. My husband--I say itwith pride--is as much valued by the one class as by the other. Wewill try to relieve the monotony of your visit here. If you stay allthe time with Monsieur Grandet, good heavens! what will become of you?Your uncle is a sordid miser who thinks of nothing but his vines; youraunt is a pious soul who can't put two ideas together; and your cousinis a little fool, without education, perfectly common, no fortune, whowill spend her life in darning towels."

　　"She is really very nice, this woman," thought Charles Grandet as heduly responded to Madame des Grassins' coquetries.

　　"It seems to me, wife, that you are taking possession of monsieur,"said the stout banker, laughing.

　　On this remark the notary and the president said a few words that weremore or less significant; but the abbe, looking at them slyly, broughttheir thoughts to a focus by taking a pinch of snuff and saying as hehanded round his snuff-box: "Who can do the honors of Saumur formonsieur so well as madame?"

　　"Ah! what do you mean by that, monsieur l'abbe?" demanded Monsieur desGrassins.

　　"I mean it in the best possible sense for you, for madame, for thetown of Saumur, and for monsieur," said the wily old man, turning toCharles.

　　The Abbe Cruchot had guessed the conversation between Charles andMadame des Grassins without seeming to pay attention to it."Monsieur," said Adolphe to Charles with an air which he tried to makefree and easy, "I don't know whether you remember me, but I had thehonor of dancing as your /vis-a-vis/ at a ball given by the Baron deNucingen, and--"

　　"Perfectly; I remember perfectly, monsieur," answered Charles, pleasedto find himself the object of general attention.

　　"Monsieur is your son?" he said to Madame des Grassins.

　　The abbe looked at her maliciously.

　　"Yes, monsieur," she answered.

　　"Then you were very young when you were in Paris?" said Charles,addressing Adolphe.

　　"You must know, monsieur," said the abbe, "that we send them toBabylon as soon as they are weaned."

　　Madame des Grassins examined the abbe with a glance of extremepenetration.

　　"It is only in the provinces," he continued, "that you will find womenof thirty and more years as fresh as madame, here, with a son about totake his degree. I almost fancy myself back in the days when the youngmen stood on chairs in the ball-room to see you dance, madame," saidthe abbe, turning to his female adversary. "To me, your triumphs arebut of yesterday--"

　　"The old rogue!" thought Madame Grassins; "can he have guessed myintentions?"

　　"It seems that I shall have a good deal of success in Saumur," thoughtCharles as he unbuttoned his great-coat, put a hand into hiswaistcoat, and cast a glance into the far distance, to imitate theattitude which Chantrey has given to Lord Byron.

　　The inattention of Pere Grandet, or, to speak more truly, thepreoccupation of mind into which the reading of the letter had plungedhim, did not escape the vigilance of the notary and the president, whotried to guess the contents of the letter by the almost imperceptiblemotions of the miser's face, which was then under the full light ofthe candle. He maintained the habitual calm of his features withevident difficulty; we may, in fact, picture to ourselves thecountenance such a man endeavored to preserve as he read the fatalletter which here follows:--

　　My Brother,--It is almost twenty-three years since we have seen

　　each other. My marriage was the occasion of our last interview,

　　after which we parted, and both of us were happy. Assuredly I

　　could not then foresee that you would one day be the prop of the

　　family whose prosperity you then predicted.

　　When you hold this letter within your hands I shall be no longer

　　living. In the position I now hold I cannot survive the disgrace

　　of bankruptcy. I have waited on the edge of the gulf until the

　　last moment, hoping to save myself. The end has come, I must sink

　　into it. The double bankruptcies of my broker and of Roguin, my

　　notary, have carried off my last resources and left me nothing. I

　　have the bitterness of owing nearly four millions, with assets not

　　more than twenty-five per cent in value to pay them. The wines in

　　my warehouses suffer from the fall in prices caused by the

　　abundance and quality of your vintage. In three days Paris will

　　cry out: "Monsieur Grandet was a knave!" and I, an honest man,

　　shall be lying in my winding-sheet of infamy. I deprive my son of

　　a good name, which I have stained, and the fortune of his mother,

　　which I have lost. He knows nothing of all this,--my unfortunate

　　child whom I idolize! We parted tenderly. He was ignorant,

　　happily, that the last beatings of my heart were spent in that

　　farewell. Will he not some day curse me? My brother, my brother!

　　the curses of our children are horrible; they can appeal against

　　ours, but theirs are irrevocable. Grandet, you are my elder

　　brother, you owe me your protection; act for me so that Charles

　　may cast no bitter words upon my grave! My brother, if I were

　　writing with my blood, with my tears, no greater anguish could I

　　put into this letter,--nor as great, for then I should weep, I

　　should bleed, I should die, I should suffer no more, but now I

　　suffer and look at death with dry eyes.

　　From henceforth you are my son's father; he has no relations, as

　　you well know, on his mother's side. Why did I not consider social

　　prejudices? Why did I yield to love? Why did I marry the natural

　　daughter of a great lord? Charles has no family. Oh, my unhappy

　　son! my son! Listen, Grandet! I implore nothing for myself,--

　　besides, your property may not be large enough to carry a mortgage

　　of three millions,--but for my son! Brother, my suppliant hands

　　are clasped as I think of you; behold them! Grandet, I confide my

　　son to you in dying, and I look at the means of death with less

　　pain as I think that you will be to him a father. He loved me

　　well, my Charles; I was good to him, I never thwarted him; he will

　　not curse me. Ah, you see! he is gentle, he is like his mother, he

　　will cause you no grief. Poor boy! accustomed to all the

　　enjoyments of luxury, he knows nothing of the privations to which

　　you and I were condemned by the poverty of our youth. And I leave

　　him ruined! alone! Yes, all my friends will avoid him, and it is I

　　who have brought this humiliation upon him! Would that I had the

　　force to send him with one thrust into the heavens to his mother's

　　side! Madness! I come back to my disaster--to his. I send him to

　　you that you may tell him in some fitting way of my death, of his

　　future fate. Be a father to him, but a good father. Do not tear

　　him all at once from his idle life, it would kill him. I beg him

　　on my knees to renounce all rights that, as his mother's heir, he

　　may have on my estate. But the prayer is superfluous; he is

　　honorable, and he will feel that he must not appear among my

　　creditors. Bring him to see this at the right time; reveal to him

　　the hard conditions of the life I have made for him: and if he

　　still has tender thoughts of me, tell him in my name that all is

　　not lost for him. Yes, work, labor, which saved us both, may give

　　him back the fortune of which I have deprived him; and if he

　　listens to his father's voice as it reaches him from the grave, he

　　will go the Indies. My brother, Charles is an upright and

　　courageous young man; give him the wherewithal to make his

　　venture; he will die sooner than not repay you the funds which you

　　may lend him. Grandet! if you will not do this, you will lay up

　　for yourself remorse. Ah, should my child find neither tenderness

　　nor succor in you, I would call down the vengeance of God upon

　　your cruelty!

　　If I had been able to save something from the wreck, I might have

　　had the right to leave him at least a portion of his mother's

　　property; but my last monthly payments have absorbed everything. I

　　did not wish to die uncertain of my child's fate; I hoped to feel

　　a sacred promise in a clasp of your hand which might have warmed

　　my heart: but time fails me. While Charles is journeying to you I

　　shall be preparing my assignment. I shall endeavor to show by the

　　order and good faith of my accounts that my disaster comes neither

　　from a faulty life nor from dishonesty. It is for my son's sake

　　that I strive to do this.

　　Farewell, my brother! May the blessing of God be yours for the

　　generous guardianship I lay upon you, and which, I doubt not, you

　　will accept. A voice will henceforth and forever pray for you in

　　that world where we must all go, and where I am now as you read

　　these lines.

　　Victor-Ange-Guillaume Grandet.

　　"So you are talking?" said Pere Grandet as he carefully folded theletter in its original creases and put it into his waistcoat-pocket.He looked at his nephew with a humble, timid air, beneath which he hidhis feelings and his calculations. "Have you warmed yourself?" he saidto him.

　　"Thoroughly, my dear uncle."

　　"Well, where are the women?" said his uncle, already forgetting thathis nephew was to sleep at the house. At this moment Eugenie andMadame Grandet returned.

　　"Is the room all ready?" said Grandet, recovering his composure."Yes, father."

　　"Well then, my nephew, if you are tired, Nanon shall show you yourroom. It isn't a dandy's room; but you will excuse a poor wine-growerwho never has a penny to spare. Taxes swallow up everything.""We do not wish to intrude, Grandet," said the banker; "you may wantto talk to your nephew, and therefore we will bid you good-night."At these words the assembly rose, and each made a parting bow inkeeping with his or her own character. The old notary went to the doorto fetch his lantern and came back to light it, offering to accompanythe des Grassins on their way. Madame des Grassins had not foreseenthe incident which brought the evening prematurely to an end, herservant therefore had not arrived.

　　"Will you do me the honor to take my arm, madame?" said the abbe."Thank you, monsieur l'abbe, but I have my son," she answered dryly."Ladies cannot compromise themselves with me," said the abbe."Take Monsieur Cruchot's arm," said her husband.

　　The abbe walked off with the pretty lady so quickly that they weresoon some distance in advance of the caravan.

　　"That is a good-looking young man, madame," he said, pressing her arm."Good-by to the grapes, the vintage is done. It is all over with us.We may as well say adieu to Mademoiselle Grandet. Eugenie will belongto the dandy. Unless this cousin is enamoured of some Parisian woman,your son Adolphe will find another rival in--"

　　"Not at all, monsieur l'abbe. This young man cannot fail to see thatEugenie is a little fool,--a girl without the least freshness. Did younotice her to-night? She was as yellow as a quince."

　　"Perhaps you made the cousin notice it?"

　　"I did not take the trouble--"

　　"Place yourself always beside Eugenie, madame, and you need never takethe trouble to say anything to the young man against his cousin; hewill make his own comparisons, which--"

　　"Well, he has promised to dine with me the day after to-morrow.""Ah! if you only /would/, madame--" said the abbe.

　　"What is it that you wish me to do, monsieur l'abbe? Do you mean tooffer me bad advice? I have not reached the age of thirty-nine,without a stain upon my reputation, thank God! to compromise myselfnow, even for the empire of the Great Mogul. You and I are of an agewhen we both know the meaning of words. For an ecclesiastic, youcertainly have ideas that are very incongruous. Fie! it is worthy ofFaublas!"

　　"You have read Faublas?"

　　"No, monsieur l'abbe; I meant to say the /Liaisons dangereuses/.""Ah! that book is infinitely more moral," said the abbe, laughing."But you make me out as wicked as a young man of the present day; Ionly meant--"

　　"Do you dare to tell me you were not thinking of putting wicked thingsinto my head? Isn't it perfectly clear? If this young man--who I admitis very good-looking--were to make love to me, he would not think ofhis cousin. In Paris, I know, good mothers do devote themselves inthis way to the happiness and welfare of their children; but we livein the provinces, monsieur l'abbe."

　　"Yes, madame."

　　"And," she continued, "I do not want, and Adolphe himself would notwant, a hundred millions brought at such a price."

　　"Madame, I said nothing about a hundred millions; that temptationmight be too great for either of us to withstand. Only, I do thinkthat an honest woman may permit herself, in all honor, certainharmless little coquetries, which are, in fact, part of her socialduty and which--"

　　"Do you think so?"

　　"Are we not bound, madame, to make ourselves agreeable to each other?--Permit me to blow my nose.--I assure you, madame," he resumed, "thatthe young gentleman ogled you through his glass in a more flatteringmanner than he put on when he looked at me; but I forgive him fordoing homage to beauty in preference to old age--"

　　"It is quite apparent," said the president in his loud voice, "thatMonsieur Grandet of Paris has sent his son to Saumur with extremelymatrimonial intentions."

　　"But in that case the cousin wouldn't have fallen among us like acannon-ball," answered the notary.

　　"That doesn't prove anything," said Monsieur des Grassins; "the oldmiser is always making mysteries."

　　"Des Grassins, my friend, I have invited the young man to dinner. Youmust go and ask Monsieur and Madame de Larsonniere and the du Hautoys,with the beautiful demoiselle du Hautoy, of course. I hope she will beproperly dressed; that jealous mother of hers does make such a frightof her! Gentlemen, I trust that you will all do us the honor to come,"she added, stopping the procession to address the two Cruchots."Here you are at home, madame," said the notary.

　　After bowing to the three des Grassins, the three Cruchots returnedhome, applying their provincial genius for analysis to studying, underall its aspects, the great event of the evening, which undoubtedlychanged the respective positions of Grassinists and Cruchotines. Theadmirable common-sense which guided all the actions of these greatmachinators made each side feel the necessity of a momentary allianceagainst a common enemy. Must they not mutually hinder Eugenie fromloving her cousin, and the cousin from thinking of Eugenie? Could theParisian resist the influence of treacherous insinuations, soft-spokencalumnies, slanders full of faint praise and artless denials, whichshould be made to circle incessantly about him and deceive him?IV

　　When the four relations were left alone, Monsieur Grandet said to hisnephew,--

　　"We must go to bed. It is too late to talk about the matters whichhave brought you here; to-morrow we will take a suitable moment. Webreakfast at eight o'clock; at midday we eat a little fruit or a bitof bread, and drink a glass of white wine; and we dine, like theParisians, at five o'clock. That's the order of the day. If you liketo go and see the town and the environs you are free to do so. Youwill excuse me if my occupations do not permit me to accompany you.You may perhaps hear people say that I am rich,--Monsieur Grandetthis, Monsieur Grandet that. I let them talk; their gossip does nothurt my credit. But I have not a penny; I work in my old age like anapprentice whose worldly goods are a bad plane and two good arms.Perhaps you'll soon know yourself what a franc costs when you have gotto sweat for it. Nanon, where are the candles?"

　　"I trust, my nephew, that you will find all you want," said MadameGrandet; "but if you should need anything else, you can call Nanon.""My dear aunt, I shall need nothing; I have, I believe, broughteverything with me. Permit me to bid you good-night, and my youngcousin also."

　　Charles took a lighted wax candle from Nanon's hand,--an Anjou candle,very yellow in color, and so shopworn that it looked like tallow anddeceived Monsieur Grandet, who, incapable of suspecting its presenceunder his roof, did not perceive this magnificence.

　　"I will show you the way," he said.

　　Instead of leaving the hall by the door which opened under thearchway, Grandet ceremoniously went through the passage which dividedthe hall from the kitchen. A swing-door, furnished with a large ovalpane of glass, shut this passage from the staircase, so as to fend offthe cold air which rushed through it. But the north wind whistled nonethe less keenly in winter, and, in spite of the sand-bags at thebottom of the doors of the living-room, the temperature within couldscarcely be kept at a proper height. Nanon went to bolt the outerdoor; then she closed the hall and let loose a wolf-dog, whose barkwas so strangled that he seemed to have laryngitis. This animal, notedfor his ferocity, recognized no one but Nanon; the two untutoredchildren of the fields understood each other.

　　When Charles saw the yellow, smoke-stained walls of the well of thestaircase, where each worm-eaten step shook under the heavy foot-fallof his uncle, his expectations began to sober more and more. Hefancied himself in a hen-roost. His aunt and cousin, to whom he turnedan inquiring look, were so used to the staircase that they did notguess the cause of his amazement, and took the glance for anexpression of friendliness, which they answered by a smile that madehim desperate.

　　"Why the devil did my father send me to such a place?" he said tohimself.

　　When they reached the first landing he saw three doors painted inEtruscan red and without casings,--doors sunk in the dusty walls andprovided with iron bars, which in fact were bolts, each ending withthe pattern of a flame, as did both ends of the long sheath of thelock. The first door at the top of the staircase, which opened into aroom directly above the kitchen, was evidently walled up. In fact, theonly entrance to that room was through Grandet's bedchamber; the roomitself was his office. The single window which lighted it, on the sideof the court, was protected by a lattice of strong iron bars. No one,not even Madame Grandet, had permission to enter it. The old man choseto be alone, like an alchemist in his laboratory. There, no doubt,some hiding-place had been ingeniously constructed; there the title-deeds of property were stored; there hung the scales on which to weighthe louis; there were devised, by night and secretly, the estimates,the profits, the receipts, so that business men, finding Grandetprepared at all points, imagined that he got his cue from fairies ordemons; there, no doubt, while Nanon's loud snoring shook the rafters,while the wolf-dog watched and yawned in the courtyard, while Madameand Mademoiselle Grandet were quietly sleeping, came the old cooper tocuddle, to con over, to caress and clutch and clasp his gold. Thewalls were thick, the screens sure. He alone had the key of thislaboratory, where--so people declared--he studied the maps on whichhis fruit-trees were marked, and calculated his profits to a vine, andalmost to a twig.

　　The door of Eugenie's chamber was opposite to the walled-up entranceto this room. At the other end of the landing were the appartements ofthe married pair, which occupied the whole front of the house. MadameGrandet had a room next to that of Eugenie, which was entered througha glass door. The master's chamber was separated from that of his wifeby a partition, and from the mysterious strong-room by a thick wall.Pere Grandet lodged his nephew on the second floor, in the highmansarde attic which was above his own bedroom, so that he might hearhim if the young man took it into his head to go and come. WhenEugenie and her mother reached the middle of the landing they kissedeach other for good-night; then with a few words of adieu to Charles,cold upon the lips, but certainly very warm in the heart of the younggirl, they withdrew into their own chambers.

　　"Here you are in your room, my nephew," said Pere Grandet as he openedthe door. "If you need to go out, call Nanon; without her, beware! thedog would eat you up without a word. Sleep well. Good-night. Ha! why,they have made you a fire!" he cried.

　　At this moment Nanon appeared with the warming pan.

　　"Here's something more!" said Monsieur Grandet. "Do you take my nephewfor a lying-in woman? Carry off your brazier, Nanon!"

　　"But, monsieur, the sheets are damp, and this gentleman is as delicateas a woman."

　　"Well, go on, as you've taken it into your head," said Grandet,pushing her by the shoulders; "but don't set things on fire." Sosaying, the miser went down-stairs, grumbling indistinct sentences.Charles stood aghast in the midst of his trunks. After casting hiseyes on the attic-walls covered with that yellow paper sprinkled withbouquets so well known in dance-houses, on the fireplace of ribbedstone whose very look was chilling, on the chairs of yellow wood withvarnished cane seats that seemed to have more than the usual fourangles, on the open night-table capacious enough to hold a smallsergeant-at-arms, on the meagre bit of rag-carpet beside the bed, onthe tester whose cloth valance shook as if, devoured by moths, it wasabout to fall, he turned gravely to la Grande Nanon and said,--"Look here! my dear woman, just tell me, am I in the house of MonsieurGrandet, formerly mayor of Saumur, and brother to Monsieur Grandet ofParis?"

　　"Yes, monsieur; and a very good, a very kind, a very perfectgentleman. Shall I help you to unpack your trunks?"

　　"Faith! yes, if you will, my old trooper. Didn't you serve in themarines of the Imperial Guard?"

　　"Ho, ho, ho!" laughed Nanon. "What's that,--the marines of the guard?Is it salt? Does it go in the water?"

　　"Here, get me my dressing-gown out of that valise; there's the key."Nanon was wonder-struck by the sight of a dressing-gown made of greensilk, brocaded with gold flowers of an antique design.

　　"Are you going to put that on to go to bed with?" she asked."Yes."

　　"Holy Virgin! what a beautiful altar-cloth it would make for theparish church! My dear darling monsieur, give it to the church, andyou'll save your soul; if you don't, you'll lose it. Oh, how nice youlook in it! I must call mademoiselle to see you."

　　"Come, Nanon, if Nanon you are, hold your tongue; let me go to bed.I'll arrange my things to-morrow. If my dressing-gown pleases you somuch, you shall save your soul. I'm too good a Christian not to giveit to you when I go away, and you can do what you like with it."Nanon stood rooted to the ground, gazing at Charles and unable to putfaith into his words.

　　"Good night, Nanon."

　　"What in the world have I come here for?" thought Charles as he wentto sleep. "My father is not a fool; my journey must have some object.Pshaw! put off serious thought till the morrow, as some Greek idiotsaid."

　　"Blessed Virgin! how charming he is, my cousin!" Eugenie was saying,interrupting her prayers, which that night at least were neverfinished.

　　Madame Grandet had no thoughts at all as she went to bed. She heardthe miser walking up and down his room through the door ofcommunication which was in the middle of the partition. Like all timidwomen, she had studied the character of her lord. Just as the petrelforesees the storm, she knew by imperceptible signs when an inwardtempest shook her husband; and at such times, to use an expression ofher own, she "feigned dead."

　　Grandet gazed at the door lined with sheet-iron which he lately put tohis sanctum, and said to himself,--

　　"What a crazy idea of my brother to bequeath his son to me! A finelegacy! I have not fifty francs to give him. What are fifty francs toa dandy who looked at my barometer as if he meant to make firewood ofit!"

　　In thinking over the consequences of that legacy of anguish Grandetwas perhaps more agitated than his brother had been at the moment ofwriting it.

　　"I shall have that golden robe," thought Nanon, who went to sleeptricked out in her altar-cloth, dreaming for the first time in herlife of flowers, embroidery, and damask, just as Eugenie was dreamingof love.

　　*****

　　In the pure and monotonous life of young girls there comes a delicioushour when the sun sheds its rays into their soul, when the flowersexpress their thoughts, when the throbbings of the heart send upwardto the brain their fertilizing warmth and melt all thoughts into avague desire,--day of innocent melancholy and of dulcet joys! Whenbabes begin to see, they smile; when a young girl first perceives thesentiment of nature, she smiles as she smiled when an infant. If lightis the first love of life, is not love a light to the heart? Themoment to see within the veil of earthly things had come for Eugenie.An early riser, like all provincial girls, she was up betimes and saidher prayers, and then began the business of dressing,--a businesswhich henceforth was to have a meaning. First she brushed and smoothedher chestnut hair and twisted its heavy masses to the top of her headwith the utmost care, preventing the loose tresses from straying, andgiving to her head a symmetry which heightened the timid candor of herface; for the simplicity of these accessories accorded well with theinnocent sincerity of its lines. As she washed her hands again andagain in the cold water which hardened and reddened the skin, shelooked at her handsome round arms and asked herself what her cousindid to make his hands so softly white, his nails so delicately curved.She put on new stockings and her prettiest shoes. She laced her corsetstraight, without skipping a single eyelet. And then, wishing for thefirst time in her life to appear to advantage, she felt the joy ofhaving a new gown, well made, which rendered her attractive.As she finished her toilet the clock of the parish church struck thehour; to her astonishment, it was only seven. The desire of havingplenty of time for dressing carefully had led her to get up too early.Ignorant of the art of retouching every curl and studying everyeffect, Eugenie simply crossed her arms, sat down by the window, andlooked at the court-yard, the narrow garden, and the high terracedwalls that over-topped it: a dismal, hedged-in prospect, yet notwholly devoid of those mysterious beauties which belong to solitary oruncultivated nature. Near the kitchen was a well surrounded by a curb,with a pulley fastened to a bent iron rod clasped by a vine whoseleaves were withered, reddened, and shrivelled by the season. Fromthence the tortuous shoots straggled to the wall, clutched it, and ranthe whole length of the house, ending near the wood-pile, where thelogs were ranged with as much precision as the books in a library. Thepavement of the court-yard showed the black stains produced in time bylichens, herbage, and the absence of all movement or friction. Thethick walls wore a coating of green moss streaked with waving brownlines, and the eight stone steps at the bottom of the court-yard whichled up to the gate of the garden were disjointed and hidden beneathtall plants, like the tomb of a knight buried by his widow in the daysof the Crusades. Above a foundation of moss-grown, crumbling stoneswas a trellis of rotten wood, half fallen from decay; over themclambered and intertwined at will a mass of clustering creepers. Oneach side of the latticed gate stretched the crooked arms of twostunted apple-trees. Three parallel walks, gravelled and separatedfrom each other by square beds, where the earth was held in by box-borders, made the garden, which terminated, beneath a terrace of theold walls, in a group of lindens. At the farther end were raspberry-bushes; at the other, near the house, an immense walnut-tree droopedits branches almost into the window of the miser's sanctum.A clear day and the beautiful autumnal sun common to the banks of theLoire was beginning to melt the hoar-frost which the night had laid onthese picturesque objects, on the walls, and on the plants whichswathed the court-yard. Eugenie found a novel charm in the aspect ofthings lately so insignificant to her. A thousand confused thoughtscame to birth in her mind and grew there, as the sunbeams grew withoutalong the wall. She felt that impulse of delight, vague, inexplicable,which wraps the moral being as a cloud wraps the physical body. Herthoughts were all in keeping with the details of this strangelandscape, and the harmonies of her heart blended with the harmoniesof nature. When the sun reached an angle of the wall where the "Venus-hair" of southern climes drooped its thick leaves, lit with thechanging colors of a pigeon's breast, celestial rays of hope illuminedthe future to her eyes, and thenceforth she loved to gaze upon thatpiece of wall, on its pale flowers, its blue harebells, its wiltingherbage, with which she mingled memories as tender as those ofchildhood. The noise made by each leaf as it fell from its twig in thevoid of that echoing court gave answer to the secret questionings ofthe young girl, who could have stayed there the livelong day withoutperceiving the flight of time. Then came tumultuous heavings of thesoul. She rose often, went to her glass, and looked at herself, as anauthor in good faith looks at his work to criticise it and blame it inhis own mind.

　　"I am not beautiful enough for him!" Such was Eugenie's thought,--ahumble thought, fertile in suffering. The poor girl did not do herselfjustice; but modesty, or rather fear, is among the first of love'svirtues. Eugenie belonged to the type of children with sturdyconstitutions, such as we see among the lesser bourgeoisie, whosebeauties always seem a little vulgar; and yet, though she resembledthe Venus of Milo, the lines of her figure were ennobled by the softerChristian sentiment which purifies womanhood and gives it adistinction unknown to the sculptors of antiquity. She had an enormoushead, with the masculine yet delicate forehead of the Jupiter ofPhidias, and gray eyes, to which her chaste life, penetrating fullyinto them, carried a flood of light. The features of her round face,formerly fresh and rosy, were at one time swollen by the small-pox,which destroyed the velvet texture of the skin, though it kindly leftno other traces, and her cheek was still so soft and delicate that hermother's kiss made a momentary red mark upon it. Her nose was somewhattoo thick, but it harmonized well with the vermilion mouth, whoselips, creased in many lines, were full of love and kindness. Thethroat was exquisitely round. The bust, well curved and carefullycovered, attracted the eye and inspired reverie. It lacked, no doubt,the grace which a fitting dress can bestow; but to a connoisseur thenon-flexibility of her figure had its own charm. Eugenie, tall andstrongly made, had none of the prettiness which pleases the masses;but she was beautiful with a beauty which the spirit recognizes, andnone but artists truly love. A painter seeking here below for a typeof Mary's celestial purity, searching womankind for those proud modesteyes which Raphael divined, for those virgin lines, often due tochances of conception, which the modesty of Christian life alone canbestow or keep unchanged,--such a painter, in love with his ideal,would have found in the face of Eugenie the innate nobleness that isignorant of itself; he would have seen beneath the calmness of thatbrow a world of love; he would have felt, in the shape of the eyes, inthe fall of the eyelids, the presence of the nameless something thatwe call divine. Her features, the contour of her head, which noexpression of pleasure had ever altered or wearied, were like thelines of the horizon softly traced in the far distance across thetranquil lakes. That calm and rosy countenance, margined with lightlike a lovely full-blown flower, rested the mind, held the eye, andimparted the charm of the conscience that was there reflected. Eugeniewas standing on the shore of life where young illusions flower, wheredaisies are gathered with delights ere long to be unknown; and thusshe said, looking at her image in the glass, unconscious as yet oflove: "I am too ugly; he will not notice me."

　　Then she opened the door of her chamber which led to the staircase,and stretched out her neck to listen for the household noises. "He isnot up," she thought, hearing Nanon's morning cough as the good soulwent and came, sweeping out the halls, lighting her fire, chaining thedog, and speaking to the beasts in the stable. Eugenie at once wentdown and ran to Nanon, who was milking the cow.

　　"Nanon, my good Nanon, make a little cream for my cousin's breakfast.""Why, mademoiselle, you should have thought of that yesterday," saidNanon, bursting into a loud peal of laughter. "I can't make cream.Your cousin is a darling, a darling! oh, that he is! You should haveseen him in his dressing-gown, all silk and gold! I saw him, I did! Hewears linen as fine as the surplice of monsieur le cure.""Nanon, please make us a /galette/."

　　"And who'll give me wood for the oven, and flour and butter for thecakes?" said Nanon, who in her function of prime-minister to Grandetassumed at times enormous importance in the eyes of Eugenie and hermother. "Mustn't rob the master to feast the cousin. You ask him forbutter and flour and wood: he's your father, perhaps he'll give yousome. See! there he is now, coming to give out the provisions."Eugenie escaped into the garden, quite frightened as she heard thestaircase shaking under her father's step. Already she felt theeffects of that virgin modesty and that special consciousness ofhappiness which lead us to fancy, not perhaps without reason, that ourthoughts are graven on our foreheads and are open to the eyes of all.Perceiving for the first time the cold nakedness of her father'shouse, the poor girl felt a sort of rage that she could not put it inharmony with her cousin's elegance. She felt the need of doingsomething for him,--what, she did not know. Ingenuous and truthful,she followed her angelic nature without mistrusting her impressions orher feelings. The mere sight of her cousin had wakened within her thenatural yearnings of a woman,--yearnings that were the more likely todevelop ardently because, having reached her twenty-third year, shewas in the plenitude of her intelligence and her desires. For thefirst time in her life her heart was full of terror at the sight ofher father; in him she saw the master of the fate, and she fanciedherself guilty of wrong-doing in hiding from his knowledge certainthoughts. She walked with hasty steps, surprised to breathe a purerair, to feel the sun's rays quickening her pulses, to absorb fromtheir heat a moral warmth and a new life. As she turned over in hermind some stratagem by which to get the cake, a quarrel--an event asrare as the sight of swallows in winter--broke out between la GrandeNanon and Grandet. Armed with his keys, the master had come to doleout provisions for the day's consumption.

　　"Is there any bread left from yesterday?" he said to Nanon."Not a crumb, monsieur."

　　Grandet took a large round loaf, well floured and moulded in one ofthe flat baskets which they use for baking in Anjou, and was about tocut it, when Nanon said to him,--

　　"We are five, to-day, monsieur."

　　"That's true," said Grandet, "but your loaves weigh six pounds;there'll be some left. Besides, these young fellows from Paris don'teat bread, you'll see."

　　"Then they must eat /frippe/?" said Nanon.

　　/Frippe/ is a word of the local lexicon of Anjou, and means anyaccompaniment of bread, from butter which is spread upon it, thecommonest kind of /frippe/, to peach preserve, the most distinguishedof all the /frippes/; those who in their childhood have licked the/frippe/ and left the bread, will comprehend the meaning of Nanon'sspeech.

　　"No," answered Grandet, "they eat neither bread nor /frippe/; they aresomething like marriageable girls."

　　After ordering the meals for the day with his usual parsimony, thegoodman, having locked the closets containing the supplies, was aboutto go towards the fruit-garden, when Nanon stopped him to say,--"Monsieur, give me a little flour and some butter, and I'll make a/galette/ for the young ones."

　　"Are you going to pillage the house on account of my nephew?""I wasn't thinking any more of your nephew than I was of your dog,--not more than you think yourself; for, look here, you've only forkedout six bits of sugar. I want eight."

　　"What's all this, Nanon? I have never seen you like this before. Whathave you got in your head? Are you the mistress here? You sha'n't havemore than six pieces of sugar."

　　"Well, then, how is your nephew to sweeten his coffee?"

　　"With two pieces; I'll go without myself."

　　"Go without sugar at your age! I'd rather buy you some out of my ownpocket."

　　"Mind your own business."

　　In spite of the recent fall in prices, sugar was still in Grandet'seyes the most valuable of all the colonial products; to him it wasalways six francs a pound. The necessity of economizing it, acquiredunder the Empire, had grown to be the most inveterate of his habits.All women, even the greatest ninnies, know how to dodge and dodge toget their ends; Nanon abandoned the sugar for the sake of getting the/galette/.

　　"Mademoiselle!" she called through the window, "do you want some/galette/?"

　　"No, no," answered Eugenie.

　　"Come, Nanon," said Grandet, hearing his daughter's voice. "See here."He opened the cupboard where the flour was kept, gave her a cupful,and added a few ounces of butter to the piece he had already cut off."I shall want wood for the oven," said the implacable Nanon."Well, take what you want," he answered sadly; "but in that case youmust make us a fruit-tart, and you'll cook the whole dinner in theoven. In that way you won't need two fires."

　　"Goodness!" cried Nanon, "you needn't tell me that."

　　Grandet cast a look that was well-nigh paternal upon his faithfuldeputy.

　　"Mademoiselle," she cried, when his back was turned, "we shall havethe /galette/."

　　Pere Grandet returned from the garden with the fruit and arranged aplateful on the kitchen-table.

　　"Just see, monsieur," said Nanon, "what pretty boots your nephew has.What leather! why it smells good! What does he clean it with, Iwonder? Am I to put your egg-polish on it?"

　　"Nanon, I think eggs would injure that kind of leather. Tell him youdon't know how to black morocco; yes, that's morocco. He will get yousomething himself in Saumur to polish those boots with. I have heardthat they put sugar into the blacking to make it shine."

　　"They look good to eat," said the cook, putting the boots to her nose."Bless me! if they don't smell like madame's eau-de-cologne. Ah! howfunny!"

　　"Funny!" said her master. "Do you call it funny to put more money intoboots than the man who stands in them is worth?"

　　"Monsieur," she said, when Grandet returned the second time, afterlocking the fruit-garden, "won't you have the /pot-au-feu/ put on onceor twice a week on account of your nephew?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Am I to go to the butcher's?"

　　"Certainly not. We will make the broth of fowls; the farmers willbring them. I shall tell Cornoiller to shoot some crows; they make thebest soup in the world."

　　"Isn't it true, monsieur, that crows eat the dead?"

　　"You are a fool, Nanon. They eat what they can get, like the rest ofthe world. Don't we all live on the dead? What are legacies?"Monsieur Grandet, having no further orders to give, drew out hiswatch, and seeing that he had half an hour to dispose of beforebreakfast, he took his hat, went and kissed his daughter, and said toher:

　　"Do you want to come for a walk in the fields, down by the Loire? Ihave something to do there."

　　Eugenie fetched her straw bonnet, lined with pink taffeta; then thefather and daughter went down the winding street to the shore."Where are you going at this early hour?" said Cruchot, the notary,meeting them.

　　"To see something," answered Grandet, not duped by the matutinalappearance of his friend.

　　When Pere Grandet went to "see something," the notary knew byexperience there was something to be got by going with him; so hewent.

　　"Come, Cruchot," said Grandet, "you are one of my friends. I'll showyou what folly it is to plant poplar-trees on good ground.""Do you call the sixty thousand francs that you pocketed for thosethat were in your fields down by the Loire, folly?" said MaitreCruchot, opening his eyes with amazement. "What luck you have had! Tocut down your trees at the very time they ran short of white-wood atNantes, and to sell them at thirty francs!"

　　Eugenie listened, without knowing that she approached the most solemnmoment of her whole life, and that the notary was about to bring downupon her head a paternal and supreme sentence. Grandet had now reachedthe magnificent fields which he owned on the banks of the Loire, wherethirty workmen were employed in clearing away, filling up, andlevelling the spots formerly occupied by the poplars.

　　"Maitre Cruchot, see how much ground this tree once took up! Jean," hecried to a laborer, "m-m-measure with your r-r-rule, b-both ways.""Four times eight feet," said the man.

　　"Thirty-two feet lost," said Grandet to Cruchot. "I had three hundredpoplars in this one line, isn't that so? Well, then, three h-h-hundredtimes thir-thirty-two lost m-m-me five hundred in h-h-hay; add twiceas much for the side rows,--fifteen hundred; the middle rows as muchmore. So we may c-c-call it a th-thousand b-b-bales of h-h-hay--""Very good," said Cruchot, to help out his friend; "a thousand balesare worth about six hundred francs."

　　"Say t-t-twelve hundred, be-c-cause there's three or four hundredfrancs on the second crop. Well, then, c-c-calculate that t-twelvethousand francs a year for f-f-forty years with interest c-c-comesto--"

　　"Say sixty thousand francs," said the notary.

　　"I am willing; c-c-comes t-t-to sixty th-th-thousand. Very good,"continued Grandet, without stuttering: "two thousand poplars fortyyears old will only yield me fifty thousand francs. There's a loss. Ihave found that myself," said Grandet, getting on his high horse."Jean, fill up all the holes except those at the bank of the river;there you are to plant the poplars I have bought. Plant 'em there, andthey'll get nourishment from the government," he said, turning toCruchot, and giving a slight motion to the wen on his nose, whichexpressed more than the most ironical of smiles.

　　"True enough; poplars should only be planted on poor soil," saidCruchot, amazed at Grandet's calculations.

　　"Y-y-yes, monsieur," answered the old man satirically.

　　Eugenie, who was gazing at the sublime scenery of the Loire, andpaying no attention to her father's reckonings, presently turned anear to the remarks of Cruchot when she heard him say,--

　　"So you have brought a son-in-law from Paris. All Saumur is talkingabout your nephew. I shall soon have the marriage-contract to draw up,hey! Pere Grandet?"

　　"You g-g-got up very early to t-t-tell me that," said Grandet,accompanying the remark with a motion of his wen. "Well, oldc-c-comrade, I'll be frank, and t-t-tell you what you want t-t-toknow. I would rather, do you see, f-f-fling my daughter into the Loirethan g-g-give her to her c-c-cousin. You may t-t-tell that everywhere,--no, never mind; let the world t-t-talk."

　　This answer dazzled and blinded the young girl with sudden light. Thedistant hopes upspringing in her heart bloomed suddenly, became real,tangible, like a cluster of flowers, and she saw them cut down andwilting on the earth. Since the previous evening she had attachedherself to Charles by those links of happiness which bind soul tosoul; from henceforth suffering was to rivet them. Is it not the nobledestiny of women to be more moved by the dark solemnities of griefthan by the splendors of fortune? How was it that fatherly feeling haddied out of her father's heart? Of what crime had Charles been guilty?Mysterious questions! Already her dawning love, a mystery so profound,was wrapping itself in mystery. She walked back trembling in all herlimbs; and when she reached the gloomy street, lately so joyous toher, she felt its sadness, she breathed the melancholy which time andevents had printed there. None of love's lessons lacked. A few stepsfrom their own door she went on before her father and waited at thethreshold. But Grandet, who saw a newspaper in the notary's hand,stopped short and asked,--

　　"How are the Funds?"

　　"You never listen to my advice, Grandet," answered Cruchot. "Buy soon;you will still make twenty per cent in two years, besides getting anexcellent rate of interest,--five thousand a year for eighty thousandfrancs fifty centimes."

　　"We'll see about that," answered Grandet, rubbing his chin."Good God!" exclaimed the notary.

　　"Well, what?" cried Grandet; and at the same moment Cruchot put thenewspaper under his eyes and said:

　　"Read that!"

　　"Monsieur Grandet, one of the most respected merchants in Paris,

　　blew his brains out yesterday, after making his usual appearance

　　at the Bourse. He had sent his resignation to the president of the

　　Chamber of Deputies, and had also resigned his functions as a

　　judge of the commercial courts. The failures of Monsieur Roguin

　　and Monsieur Souchet, his broker and his notary, had ruined him.

　　The esteem felt for Monsieur Grandet and the credit he enjoyed

　　were nevertheless such that he might have obtained the necessary

　　assistance from other business houses. It is much to be regretted

　　that so honorable a man should have yielded to momentary despair,"

　　etc.

　　"I knew it," said the old wine-grower to the notary.

　　The words sent a chill of horror through Maitre Cruchot, who,notwithstanding his impassibility as a notary, felt the cold runningdown his spine as he thought that Grandet of Paris had possiblyimplored in vain the millions of Grandet of Saumur.

　　"And his son, so joyous yesterday--"

　　"He knows nothing as yet," answered Grandet, with the same composure."Adieu! Monsieur Grandet," said Cruchot, who now understood the stateof the case, and went off to reassure Monsieur de Bonfons.On entering, Grandet found breakfast ready. Madame Grandet, roundwhose neck Eugenie had flung her arms, kissing her with the quickeffusion of feeling often caused by secret grief, was already seatedin her chair on castors, knitting sleeves for the coming winter."You can begin to eat," said Nanon, coming downstairs four steps at atime; "the young one is sleeping like a cherub. Isn't he a darlingwith his eyes shut? I went in and I called him: no answer.""Let him sleep," said Grandet; "he'll wake soon enough to hear ill-tidings."

　　"What is it?" asked Eugenie, putting into her coffee the two littlebits of sugar weighing less than half an ounce which the old miseramused himself by cutting up in his leisure hours. Madame Grandet, whodid not dare to put the question, gazed at her husband.

　　"His father has blown his brains out."

　　"My uncle?" said Eugenie.

　　"Poor young man!" exclaimed Madame Grandet.

　　"Poor indeed!" said Grandet; "he isn't worth a sou!"

　　"Eh! poor boy, and he's sleeping like the king of the world!" saidNanon in a gentle voice.

　　Eugenie stopped eating. Her heart was wrung, as the young heart iswrung when pity for the suffering of one she loves overflows, for thefirst time, the whole being of a woman. The poor girl wept."What are you crying about? You didn't know your uncle," said herfather, giving her one of those hungry tigerish looks he doubtlessthrew upon his piles of gold.

　　"But, monsieur," said Nanon, "who wouldn't feel pity for the pooryoung man, sleeping there like a wooden shoe, without knowing what'scoming?"

　　"I didn't speak to you, Nanon. Hold your tongue!"

　　Eugenie learned at that moment that the woman who loves must be ableto hide her feelings. She did not answer.

　　"You will say nothing to him about it, Ma'ame Grandet, till I return,"said the old man. "I have to go and straighten the line of my hedgealong the high-road. I shall be back at noon, in time for the secondbreakfast, and then I will talk with my nephew about his affairs. Asfor you, Mademoiselle Eugenie, if it is for that dandy you are crying,that's enough, child. He's going off like a shot to the Indies. Youwill never see him again."

　　The father took his gloves from the brim of his hat, put them on withhis usual composure, pushed them in place by shoving the fingers ofboth hands together, and went out.

　　"Mamma, I am suffocating!" cried Eugenie when she was alone with hermother; "I have never suffered like this."

　　Madame Grandet, seeing that she turned pale, opened the window and lether breathe fresh air.

　　"I feel better!" said Eugenie after a moment.

　　This nervous excitement in a nature hitherto, to all appearance, calmand cold, reacted on Madame Grandet; she looked at her daughter withthe sympathetic intuition with which mothers are gifted for theobjects of their tenderness, and guessed all. In truth the life of theHungarian sisters, bound together by a freak of nature, could scarcelyhave been more intimate than that of Eugenie and her mother,--alwaystogether in the embrasure of that window, and sleeping together in thesame atmosphere.

　　"My poor child!" said Madame Grandet, taking Eugenie's head and layingit upon her bosom.

　　At these words the young girl raised her head, questioned her motherby a look, and seemed to search out her inmost thought.

　　"Why send him to the Indies?" she said. "If he is unhappy, ought henot to stay with us? Is he not our nearest relation?"

　　"Yes, my child, it seems natural; but your father has his reasons: wemust respect them."

　　The mother and daughter sat down in silence, the former upon herraised seat, the latter in her little armchair, and both took up theirwork. Swelling with gratitude for the full heart-understanding hermother had given her, Eugenie kissed the dear hand, saying,--"How good you are, my kind mamma!"

　　The words sent a glow of light into the motherly face, worn andblighted as it was by many sorrows.

　　"You like him?" asked Eugenie.

　　Madame Grandet only smiled in reply. Then, after a moment's silence,she said in a low voice: "Do you love him already? That is wrong.""Wrong?" said Eugenie. "Why is it wrong? You are pleased with him,Nanon is pleased with him; why should he not please me? Come, mamma,let us set the table for his breakfast."

　　She threw down her work, and her mother did the same, saying, "Foolishchild!" But she sanctioned the child's folly by sharing it. Eugeniecalled Nanon.

　　"What do you want now, mademoiselle?"

　　"Nanon, can we have cream by midday?"

　　"Ah! midday, to be sure you can," answered the old servant."Well, let him have his coffee very strong; I heard Monsieur desGrassins say that they make the coffee very strong in Paris. Put in agreat deal."

　　"Where am I to get it?"

　　"Buy some."

　　"Suppose monsieur meets me?"

　　"He has gone to his fields."

　　"I'll run, then. But Monsieur Fessard asked me yesterday if the Magihad come to stay with us when I bought the wax candle. All the townwill know our goings-on."

　　"If your father finds it out," said Madame Grandet, "he is capable ofbeating us."

　　"Well, let him beat us; we will take his blows on our knees."Madame Grandet for all answer raised her eyes to heaven. Nanon put onher hood and went off. Eugenie got out some clean table-linen, andwent to fetch a few bunches of grapes which she had amused herself byhanging on a string across the attic; she walked softly along thecorridor, so as not to waken her cousin, and she could not helplistening at the door to his quiet breathing.

　　"Sorrow is watching while he sleeps," she thought.

　　She took the freshest vine-leaves and arranged her dish of grapes ascoquettishly as a practised house-keeper might have done, and placedit triumphantly on the table. She laid hands on the pears counted outby her father, and piled them in a pyramid mixed with leaves. She wentand came, and skipped and ran. She would have liked to lay undercontribution everything in her father's house; but the keys were inhis pocket. Nanon came back with two fresh eggs. At sight of themEugenie almost hugged her round the neck.

　　"The farmer from Lande had them in his basket. I asked him for them,and he gave them to me, the darling, for nothing, as an attention!"VAfter two hours' thought and care, during which Eugenie jumped uptwenty times from her work to see if the coffee were boiling, or to goand listen to the noise her cousin made in dressing, she succeeded inpreparing a simple little breakfast, very inexpensive, but which,nevertheless, departed alarmingly from the inveterate customs of thehouse. The midday breakfast was always taken standing. Each took aslice of bread, a little fruit or some butter, and a glass of wine. AsEugenie looked at the table drawn up near the fire with an arm-chairplaced before her cousin's plate, at the two dishes of fruit, the egg-cup, the bottle of white wine, the bread, and the sugar heaped up in asaucer, she trembled in all her limbs at the mere thought of the lookher father would give her if he should come in at that moment. Sheglanced often at the clock to see if her cousin could breakfast beforethe master's return.

　　"Don't be troubled, Eugenie; if your father comes in, I will take itall upon myself," said Madame Grandet.

　　Eugenie could not repress a tear.

　　"Oh, my good mother!" she cried, "I have never loved you enough."Charles, who had been tramping about his room for some time, singingto himself, now came down. Happily, it was only eleven o'clock. Thetrue Parisian! he had put as much dandyism into his dress as if hewere in the chateau of the noble lady then travelling in Scotland. Hecame into the room with the smiling, courteous manner so becoming toyouth, which made Eugenie's heart beat with mournful joy. He had takenthe destruction of his castles in Anjou as a joke, and came up to hisaunt gaily.

　　"Have you slept well, dear aunt? and you, too, my cousin?""Very well, monsieur; did you?" said Madame Grandet.

　　"I? perfectly."

　　"You must be hungry, cousin," said Eugenie; "will you take your seat?""I never breakfast before midday; I never get up till then. However, Ifared so badly on the journey that I am glad to eat something at once.Besides--" here he pulled out the prettiest watch Breguet ever made."Dear me! I am early, it is only eleven o'clock!"

　　"Early?" said Madame Grandet.

　　"Yes; but I wanted to put my things in order. Well, I shall be glad tohave anything to eat,--anything, it doesn't matter what, a chicken, apartridge."

　　"Holy Virgin!" exclaimed Nanon, overhearing the words.

　　"A partridge!" whispered Eugenie to herself; she would gladly havegiven the whole of her little hoard for a partridge.

　　"Come and sit down," said his aunt.

　　The young dandy let himself drop into an easy-chair, just as a prettywoman falls gracefully upon a sofa. Eugenie and her mother tookordinary chairs and sat beside him, near the fire.

　　"Do you always live here?" said Charles, thinking the room uglier bydaylight than it had seemed the night before.

　　"Always," answered Eugenie, looking at him, "except during thevintage. Then we go and help Nanon, and live at the Abbaye desNoyers."

　　"Don't you ever take walks?"

　　"Sometimes on Sunday after vespers, when the weather is fine," saidMadame Grandet, "we walk on the bridge, or we go and watch thehaymakers."

　　"Have you a theatre?"

　　"Go to the theatre!" exclaimed Madame Grandet, "see a play! Why,monsieur, don't you know it is a mortal sin?"

　　"See here, monsieur," said Nanon, bringing in the eggs, "here are yourchickens,--in the shell."

　　"Oh! fresh eggs," said Charles, who, like all people accustomed toluxury, had already forgotten about his partridge, "that is delicious:now, if you will give me the butter, my good girl."

　　"Butter! then you can't have the /galette/."

　　"Nanon, bring the butter," cried Eugenie.

　　The young girl watched her cousin as he cut his sippets, with as muchpleasure as a grisette takes in a melodrama where innocence and virtuetriumph. Charles, brought up by a charming mother, improved, andtrained by a woman of fashion, had the elegant, dainty, foppishmovements of a coxcomb. The compassionate sympathy and tenderness of ayoung girl possess a power that is actually magnetic; so that Charles,finding himself the object of the attentions of his aunt and cousin,could not escape the influence of feelings which flowed towards him,as it were, and inundated him. He gave Eugenie a bright, caressinglook full of kindness,--a look which seemed itself a smile. Heperceived, as his eyes lingered upon her, the exquisite harmony offeatures in the pure face, the grace of her innocent attitude, themagic clearness of the eyes, where young love sparkled and desireshone unconsciously.

　　"Ah! my dear cousin, if you were in full dress at the Opera, I assureyou my aunt's words would come true,--you would make the men committhe mortal sin of envy, and the women the sin of jealousy."The compliment went to Eugenie's heart and set it beating, though shedid not understand its meaning.

　　"Oh! cousin," she said, "you are laughing at a poor little countrygirl."

　　"If you knew me, my cousin, you would know that I abhor ridicule; itwithers the heart and jars upon all my feelings." Here he swallowedhis buttered sippet very gracefully. "No, I really have not enoughmind to make fun of others; and doubtless it is a great defect. InParis, when they want to disparage a man, they say: 'He has a goodheart.' The phrase means: 'The poor fellow is as stupid as arhinoceros.' But as I am rich, and known to hit the bull's-eye atthirty paces with any kind of pistol, and even in the open fields,ridicule respects me."

　　"My dear nephew, that bespeaks a good heart."

　　"You have a very pretty ring," said Eugenie; "is there any harm inasking to see it?"

　　Charles held out his hand after loosening the ring, and Eugenieblushed as she touched the pink nails of her cousin with the tips ofher fingers.

　　"See, mamma, what beautiful workmanship."

　　"My! there's a lot of gold!" said Nanon, bringing in the coffee."What is that?" exclaimed Charles, laughing, as he pointed to anoblong pot of brown earthenware, glazed on the inside, and edged witha fringe of ashes, from the bottom of which the coffee-grounds werebubbling up and falling in the boiling liquid.

　　"It is boiled coffee," said Nanon.

　　"Ah! my dear aunt, I shall at least leave one beneficent trace of myvisit here. You are indeed behind the age! I must teach you to makegood coffee in a Chaptal coffee-pot."

　　He tried to explain the process of a Chaptal coffee-pot.

　　"Gracious! if there are so many things as all that to do," said Nanon,"we may as well give up our lives to it. I shall never make coffeethat way; I know that! Pray, who is to get the fodder for the cowwhile I make the coffee?"

　　"I will make it," said Eugenie.

　　"Child!" said Madame Grandet, looking at her daughter.

　　The word recalled to their minds the sorrow that was about to fallupon the unfortunate young man; the three women were silent, andlooked at him with an air of commiseration that caught his attention."Is anything the matter, my cousin?" he said.

　　"Hush!" said Madame Grandet to Eugenie, who was about to answer; "youknow, my daughter, that your father charged us not to speak tomonsieur--"

　　"Say Charles," said young Grandet.

　　"Ah! you are called Charles? What a beautiful name!" cried Eugenie.Presentiments of evil are almost always justified. At this momentNanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie, who had all three been thinkingwith a shudder of the old man's return, heard the knock whose echoesthey knew but too well.

　　"There's papa!" said Eugenie.

　　She removed the saucer filled with sugar, leaving a few pieces on thetable-cloth; Nanon carried off the egg-cup; Madame Grandet sat up likea frightened hare. It was evidently a panic, which amazed Charles, whowas wholly unable to understand it.

　　"Why! what is the matter?" he asked.

　　"My father has come," answered Eugenie.

　　"Well, what of that?"

　　Monsieur Grandet entered the room, threw his keen eye upon the table,upon Charles, and saw the whole thing.

　　"Ha! ha! so you have been making a feast for your nephew; very good,very good, very good indeed!" he said, without stuttering. "When thecat's away, the mice will play."

　　"Feast!" thought Charles, incapable of suspecting or imagining therules and customs of the household.

　　"Give me my glass, Nanon," said the master

　　Eugenie brought the glass. Grandet drew a horn-handled knife with abig blade from his breeches' pocket, cut a slice of bread, took asmall bit of butter, spread it carefully on the bread, and ate itstanding. At this moment Charlie was sweetening his coffee. PereGrandet saw the bits of sugar, looked at his wife, who turned pale,and made three steps forward; he leaned down to the poor woman's earand said,--

　　"Where did you get all that sugar?"

　　"Nanon fetched it from Fessard's; there was none."

　　It is impossible to picture the profound interest the three women tookin this mute scene. Nanon had left her kitchen and stood looking intothe room to see what would happen. Charles, having tasted his coffee,found it bitter and glanced about for the sugar, which Grandet hadalready put away.

　　"What do you want?" said his uncle.

　　"The sugar."

　　"Put in more milk," answered the master of the house; "your coffeewill taste sweeter."

　　Eugenie took the saucer which Grandet had put away and placed it onthe table, looking calmly at her father as she did so. Most assuredly,the Parisian woman who held a silken ladder with her feeble arms tofacilitate the flight of her lover, showed no greater courage thanEugenie displayed when she replaced the sugar upon the table. Thelover rewarded his mistress when she proudly showed him her beautifulbruised arm, and bathed every swollen vein with tears and kisses tillit was cured with happiness. Charles, on the other hand, never so muchas knew the secret of the cruel agitation that shook and bruised theheart of his cousin, crushed as it was by the look of the old miser."You are not eating your breakfast, wife."

　　The poor helot came forward with a piteous look, cut herself a pieceof bread, and took a pear. Eugenie boldly offered her father somegrapes, saying,--

　　"Taste my preserves, papa. My cousin, you will eat some, will you not?I went to get these pretty grapes expressly for you."

　　"If no one stops them, they will pillage Saumur for you, nephew. Whenyou have finished, we will go into the garden; I have something totell you which can't be sweetened."

　　Eugenie and her mother cast a look on Charles whose meaning the youngman could not mistake.

　　"What is it you mean, uncle? Since the death of my poor mother"--atthese words his voice softened--"no other sorrow can touch me.""My nephew, who knows by what afflictions God is pleased to try us?"said his aunt.

　　"Ta, ta, ta, ta," said Grandet, "there's your nonsense beginning. I amsorry to see those white hands of yours, nephew"; and he showed theshoulder-of-mutton fists which Nature had put at the end of his ownarms. "There's a pair of hands made to pick up silver pieces. You'vebeen brought up to put your feet in the kid out of which we make thepurses we keep our money in. A bad look-out! Very bad!"

　　"What do you mean, uncle? I'll be hanged if I understand a single wordof what you are saying."

　　"Come!" said Grandet.

　　The miser closed the blade of his knife with a snap, drank the last ofhis wine, and opened the door.

　　"My cousin, take courage!"

　　The tone of the young girl struck terror to Charles's heart, and hefollowed his terrible uncle, a prey to disquieting thoughts. Eugenie,her mother, and Nanon went into the kitchen, moved by irresistiblecuriosity to watch the two actors in the scene which was about to takeplace in the garden, where at first the uncle walked silently ahead ofthe nephew. Grandet was not at all troubled at having to tell Charlesof the death of his father; but he did feel a sort of compassion inknowing him to be without a penny, and he sought for some phrase orformula by which to soften the communication of that cruel truth. "Youhave lost your father," seemed to him a mere nothing to say; fathersdie before their children. But "you are absolutely without means,"--all the misfortunes of life were summed up in those words! Grandetwalked round the garden three times, the gravel crunching under hisheavy step.

　　In the crucial moments of life our minds fasten upon the localitywhere joys or sorrows overwhelm us. Charles noticed with minuteattention the box-borders of the little garden, the yellow leaves asthey fluttered down, the dilapidated walls, the gnarled fruit-trees,--picturesque details which were destined to remain forever in hismemory, blending eternally, by the mnemonics that belong exclusivelyto the passions, with the recollections of this solemn hour."It is very fine weather, very warm," said Grandet, drawing a longbreath.

　　"Yes, uncle; but why--"

　　"Well, my lad," answered his uncle, "I have some bad news to give you.Your father is ill--"

　　"Then why am I here?" said Charles. "Nanon," he cried, "order post-horses! I can get a carriage somewhere?" he added, turning to hisuncle, who stood motionless.

　　"Horses and carriages are useless," answered Grandet, looking atCharles, who remained silent, his eyes growing fixed. "Yes, my poorboy, you guess the truth,--he is dead. But that's nothing; there issomething worse: he blew out his brains."

　　"My father!"

　　"Yes, but that's not the worst; the newspapers are all talking aboutit. Here, read that."

　　Grandet, who had borrowed the fatal article from Cruchot, thrust thepaper under his nephew's eyes. The poor young man, still a child,still at an age when feelings wear no mask, burst into tears."That's good!" thought Grandet; "his eyes frightened me. He'll be allright if he weeps,--That is not the worst, my poor nephew," he saidaloud, not noticing whether Charles heard him, "that is nothing; youwill get over it: but--"

　　"Never, never! My father! Oh, my father!"

　　"He has ruined you, you haven't a penny."

　　"What does that matter? My father! Where is my father?"

　　His sobs resounded horribly against those dreary walls andreverberated in the echoes. The three women, filled with pity, weptalso; for tears are often as contagious as laughter. Charles, withoutlistening further to his uncle, ran through the court and up thestaircase to his chamber, where he threw himself across the bed andhid his face in the sheets, to weep in peace for his lost parents."The first burst must have its way," said Grandet, entering theliving-room, where Eugenie and her mother had hastily resumed theirseats and were sewing with trembling hands, after wiping their eyes."But that young man is good for nothing; his head is more taken upwith the dead than with his money."

　　Eugenie shuddered as she heard her father's comment on the most sacredof all griefs. From that moment she began to judge him. Charles'ssobs, though muffled, still sounded through the sepulchral house; andhis deep groans, which seemed to come from the earth beneath, onlyceased towards evening, after growing gradually feebler.

　　"Poor young man!" said Madame Grandet.

　　Fatal exclamation! Pere Grandet looked at his wife, at Eugenie, and atthe sugar-bowl. He recollected the extraordinary breakfast preparedfor the unfortunate youth, and he took a position in the middle of theroom.

　　"Listen to me," he said, with his usual composure. "I hope that youwill not continue this extravagance, Madame Grandet. I don't give youMY money to stuff that young fellow with sugar."

　　"My mother had nothing to do with it," said Eugenie; "it was I who--""Is it because you are of age," said Grandet, interrupting hisdaughter, "that you choose to contradict me? Remember, Eugenie--""Father, the son of your brother ought to receive from us--""Ta, ta, ta, ta!" exclaimed the cooper on four chromatic tones; "theson of my brother this, my nephew that! Charles is nothing at all tous; he hasn't a farthing, his father has failed; and when this dandyhas cried his fill, off he goes from here. I won't have himrevolutionize my household."

　　"What is 'failing,' father?" asked Eugenie.

　　"To fail," answered her father, "is to commit the most dishonorableaction that can disgrace a man."

　　"It must be a great sin," said Madame Grandet, "and our brother may bedamned."

　　"There, there, don't begin with your litanies!" said Grandet,shrugging his shoulders. "To fail, Eugenie," he resumed, "is to commita theft which the law, unfortunately, takes under its protection.People have given their property to Guillaume Grandet trusting to hisreputation for honor and integrity; he has made away with it all, andleft them nothing but their eyes to weep with. A highway robber isbetter than a bankrupt: the one attacks you and you can defendyourself, he risks his own life; but the other--in short, Charles isdishonored."

　　The words rang in the poor girl's heart and weighed it down with theirheavy meaning. Upright and delicate as a flower born in the depths ofa forest, she knew nothing of the world's maxims, of its deceitfularguments and specious sophisms; she therefore believed the atrociousexplanation which her father gave her designedly, concealing thedistinction which exists between an involuntary failure and anintentional one.

　　"Father, could you not have prevented such a misfortune?""My brother did not consult me. Besides, he owes four millions.""What is a 'million,' father?" she asked, with the simplicity of achild which thinks it can find out at once all that it wants to know."A million?" said Grandet, "why, it is a million pieces of twenty souseach, and it takes five twenty sous pieces to make five francs.""Dear me!" cried Eugenie, "how could my uncle possibly have had fourmillions? Is there any one else in France who ever had so manymillions?" Pere Grandet stroked his chin, smiled, and his wen seemedto dilate. "But what will become of my cousin Charles?"

　　"He is going off to the West Indies by his father's request, and hewill try to make his fortune there."

　　"Has he got the money to go with?"

　　"I shall pay for his journey as far as--yes, as far as Nantes."Eugenie sprang into his arms.

　　"Oh, father, how good you are!"

　　She kissed him with a warmth that almost made Grandet ashamed ofhimself, for his conscience galled him a little.

　　"Will it take much time to amass a million?" she asked.

　　"Look here!" said the old miser, "you know what a napoleon is? Well,it takes fifty thousand napoleons to make a million."

　　"Mamma, we must say a great many /neuvaines/ for him."

　　"I was thinking so," said Madame Grandet.

　　"That's the way, always spending my money!" cried the father. "Do youthink there are francs on every bush?"

　　At this moment a muffled cry, more distressing than all the others,echoed through the garrets and struck a chill to the hearts of Eugenieand her mother.

　　"Nanon, go upstairs and see that he does not kill himself," saidGrandet. "Now, then," he added, looking at his wife and daughter, whohad turned pale at his words, "no nonsense, you two! I must leave you;I have got to see about the Dutchmen who are going away to-day. Andthen I must find Cruchot, and talk with him about all this."He departed. As soon as he had shut the door Eugenie and her motherbreathed more freely. Until this morning the young girl had never feltconstrained in the presence of her father; but for the last few hoursevery moment wrought a change in her feelings and ideas.

　　"Mamma, how many louis are there in a cask of wine?"

　　"Your father sells his from a hundred to a hundred and fifty francs,sometimes two hundred,--at least, so I've heard say."

　　"Then papa must be rich?"

　　"Perhaps he is. But Monsieur Cruchot told me he bought Froidfond twoyears ago; that may have pinched him."

　　Eugenie, not being able to understand the question of her father'sfortune, stopped short in her calculations.

　　"He didn't even see me, the darling!" said Nanon, coming back from hererrand. "He's stretched out like a calf on his bed and crying like theMadeleine, and that's a blessing! What's the matter with the poor dearyoung man!"

　　"Let us go and console him, mamma; if any one knocks, we can comedown."

　　Madame Grandet was helpless against the sweet persuasive tones of herdaughter's voice. Eugenie was sublime: she had become a woman. Thetwo, with beating hearts, went up to Charles's room. The door wasopen. The young man heard and saw nothing; plunged in grief, he onlyuttered inarticulate cries.

　　"How he loves his father!" said Eugenie in a low voice.

　　In the utterance of those words it was impossible to mistake the hopesof a heart that, unknown to itself, had suddenly become passionate.Madame Grandet cast a mother's look upon her daughter, and thenwhispered in her ear,--

　　"Take care, you will love him!"

　　"Love him!" answered Eugenie. "Ah! if you did but know what my fathersaid to Monsieur Cruchot."

　　Charles turned over, and saw his aunt and cousin.

　　"I have lost my father, my poor father! If he had told me his secrettroubles we might have worked together to repair them. My God! my poorfather! I was so sure I should see him again that I think I kissed himquite coldly--"

　　Sobs cut short the words.

　　"We will pray for him," said Madame Grandet. "Resign yourself to thewill of God."

　　"Cousin," said Eugenie, "take courage! Your loss is irreparable;therefore think only of saving your honor."

　　With the delicate instinct of a woman who intuitively puts her mindinto all things, even at the moment when she offers consolation,Eugenie sought to cheat her cousin's grief by turning his thoughtsinward upon himself.

　　"My honor?" exclaimed the young man, tossing aside his hair with animpatient gesture as he sat up on his bed and crossed his arms. "Ah!that is true. My uncle said my father had failed." He uttered a heart-rending cry, and hid his face in his hands. "Leave me, leave me,cousin! My God! my God! forgive my father, for he must have sufferedsorely!"

　　There was something terribly attractive in the sight of this youngsorrow, sincere without reasoning or afterthought. It was a virgingrief which the simple hearts of Eugenie and her mother were fitted tocomprehend, and they obeyed the sign Charles made them to leave him tohimself. They went downstairs in silence and took their accustomedplaces by the window and sewed for nearly an hour without exchanging aword. Eugenie had seen in the furtive glance that she cast about theyoung man's room--that girlish glance which sees all in the twinklingof an eye--the pretty trifles of his dressing-case, his scissors, hisrazors embossed with gold. This gleam of luxury across her cousin'sgrief only made him the more interesting to her, possibly by way ofcontrast. Never before had so serious an event, so dramatic a sight,touched the imaginations of these two passive beings, hitherto sunk inthe stillness and calm of solitude.

　　"Mamma," said Eugenie, "we must wear mourning for my uncle.""Your father will decide that," answered Madame Grandet.

　　They relapsed into silence. Eugenie drew her stitches with a uniformmotion which revealed to an observer the teeming thoughts of hermeditation. The first desire of the girl's heart was to share hercousin's mourning.

　　VI

　　About four o'clock an abrupt knock at the door struck sharply on theheart of Madame Grandet.

　　"What can have happened to your father?" she said to her daughter.Grandet entered joyously. After taking off his gloves, he rubbed hishands hard enough to take off their skin as well, if his epidermis hadnot been tanned and cured like Russia leather,--saving, of course, theperfume of larch-trees and incense. Presently his secret escaped him."Wife," he said, without stuttering, "I've trapped them all! Our wineis sold! The Dutch and the Belgians have gone. I walked about themarket-place in front of their inn, pretending to be doing nothing.That Belgian fellow--you know who I mean--came up to me. The owners ofall the good vineyards have kept back their vintages, intending towait; well, I didn't hinder them. The Belgian was in despair; I sawthat. In a minute the bargain was made. He takes my vintage at twohundred francs the puncheon, half down. He paid me in gold; the notesare drawn. Here are six louis for you. In three months wines will havefallen."

　　These words, uttered in a quiet tone of voice, were nevertheless sobitterly sarcastic that the inhabitants of Saumur, grouped at thismoment in the market-place and overwhelmed by the news of the saleGrandet had just effected, would have shuddered had they heard them.Their panic would have brought the price of wines down fifty per centat once.

　　"Did you have a thousand puncheons this year, father?"

　　"Yes, little one."

　　That term applied to his daughter was the superlative expression ofthe old miser's joy.

　　"Then that makes two hundred thousand pieces of twenty sous each?""Yes, Mademoiselle Grandet."

　　"Then, father, you can easily help Charles."

　　The amazement, the anger, the stupefaction of Belshazzar when he sawthe /Mene-Tekel-Upharsin/ before his eyes is not to be compared withthe cold rage of Grandet, who, having forgotten his nephew, now foundhim enshrined in the heart and calculations of his daughter."What's this? Ever since that dandy put foot in MY house everythinggoes wrong! You behave as if you had the right to buy sugar-plums andmake feasts and weddings. I won't have that sort of thing. I hope Iknow my duty at my time of life! I certainly sha'n't take lessons frommy daughter, or from anybody else. I shall do for my nephew what it isproper to do, and you have no need to poke your nose into it. As foryou, Eugenie," he added, facing her, "don't speak of this again, orI'll send you to the Abbaye des Noyers with Nanon, see if I don't; andno later than to-morrow either, if you disobey me! Where is thatfellow, has he come down yet?"

　　"No, my friend," answered Madame Grandet.

　　"What is he doing then?"

　　"He is weeping for his father," said Eugenie.

　　Grandet looked at his daughter without finding a word to say; afterall, he was a father. He made a couple of turns up and down the room,and then went hurriedly to his secret den to think over an investmenthe was meditating in the public Funds. The thinning out of his twothousand acres of forest land had yielded him six hundred thousandfrancs: putting this sum to that derived from the sale of his poplarsand to his other gains for the last year and for the current year, hehad amassed a total of nine hundred thousand francs, without countingthe two hundred thousand he had got by the sale just concluded. Thetwenty per cent which Cruchot assured him would gain in a short timefrom the Funds, then quoted at seventy, tempted him. He figured outhis calculation on the margin of the newspaper which gave the accountof his brother's death, all the while hearing the moans of his nephew,but without listening to them. Nanon came and knocked on the wall tosummon him to dinner. On the last step of the staircase he was sayingto himself as he came down,--

　　"I'll do it; I shall get eight per cent interest. In two years I shallhave fifteen hundred thousand francs, which I will then draw out ingood gold,--Well, where's my nephew?"

　　"He says he doesn't want anything to eat," answered Nanon; "that's notgood for him."

　　"So much saved," retorted her master.

　　"That's so," she said.

　　"Bah! he won't cry long. Hunger drives the wolves out of the woods."The dinner was eaten in silence.

　　"My good friend," said Madame Grandet, when the cloth was removed, "wemust put on mourning."

　　"Upon my word, Madame Grandet! what will you invent next to spendmoney on? Mourning is in the heart, and not in the clothes.""But mourning for a brother is indispensable; and the Church commandsus to--"

　　"Buy your mourning out of your six louis. Give me a hat-band; that'senough for me."

　　Eugenie raised her eyes to heaven without uttering a word. Hergenerous instincts, slumbering and long repressed but now suddenly andfor the first time awakened, were galled at every turn. The eveningpassed to all appearance like a thousand other evenings of theirmonotonous life, yet it was certainly the most horrible. Eugenie sewedwithout raising her head, and did not use the workbox which Charleshad despised the night before. Madame Grandet knitted her sleeves.Grandet twirled his thumbs for four hours, absorbed in calculationswhose results were on the morrow to astonish Saumur. No one came tovisit the family that day. The whole town was ringing with the news ofthe business trick just played by Grandet, the failure of his brother,and the arrival of his nephew. Obeying the desire to gossip over theirmutual interests, all the upper and middle-class wine-growers inSaumur met at Monsieur des Grassins, where terrible imprecations werebeing fulminated against the ex-mayor. Nanon was spinning, and thewhirr of her wheel was the only sound heard beneath the gray raftersof that silent hall.

　　"We don't waste our tongues," she said, showing her teeth, as largeand white as peeled almonds.

　　"Nothing should be wasted," answered Grandet, rousing himself from hisreverie. He saw a perspective of eight millions in three years, and hewas sailing along that sheet of gold. "Let us go to bed. I will bid mynephew good-night for the rest of you, and see if he will takeanything."

　　Madame Grandet remained on the landing of the first storey to hear theconversation that was about to take place between the goodman and hisnephew. Eugenie, bolder than her mother, went up two stairs."Well, nephew, you are in trouble. Yes, weep, that's natural. A fatheris a father; but we must bear our troubles patiently. I am a gooduncle to you, remember that. Come, take courage! Will you have alittle glass of wine?" (Wine costs nothing in Saumur, and they offerit as tea is offered in China.) "Why!" added Grandet, "you have got nolight! That's bad, very bad; you ought to see what you are about," andhe walked to the chimney-piece. "What's this?" he cried. "A waxcandle! How the devil did they filch a wax candle? The spendthriftswould tear down the ceilings of my house to boil the fellow's eggs."Hearing these words, mother and daughter slipped back into their roomsand burrowed in their beds, with the celerity of frightened micegetting back to their holes.

　　"Madame Grandet, have you found a mine?" said the man, coming into thechamber of his wife.

　　"My friend, wait; I am saying my prayers," said the poor mother in atrembling voice.

　　"The devil take your good God!" growled Grandet in reply.Misers have no belief in a future life; the present is their all inall. This thought casts a terrible light upon our present epoch, inwhich, far more than at any former period, money sways the laws andpolitics and morals.  Institutions, books, men, and dogmas, allconspire to undermine belief in a future life,--a belief upon whichthe social edifice has rested for eighteen hundred years. The grave,as a means of transition, is little feared in our day. The future,which once opened to us beyond the requiems, has now been importedinto the present. To obtain /per fas et nefas/ a terrestrial paradiseof luxury and earthly enjoyment, to harden the heart and macerate thebody for the sake of fleeting possessions, as the martyrs oncesuffered all things to reach eternal joys, this is now the universalthought--a thought written everywhere, even in the very laws which askof the legislator, "What do you pay?" instead of asking him, "What doyou think?" When this doctrine has passed down from the bourgeoisie tothe populace, where will this country be?

　　"Madame Grandet, have you done?" asked the old man.

　　"My friend, I am praying for you."

　　"Very good! Good-night; to-morrow morning we will have a talk."The poor woman went to sleep like a schoolboy who, not having learnedhis lessons, knows he will see his master's angry face on the morrow.At the moment when, filled with fear, she was drawing the sheet aboveher head that she might stifle hearing, Eugenie, in her night-gown andwith naked feet, ran to her side and kissed her brow.

　　"Oh! my good mother," she said, "to-morrow I will tell him it was I.""No; he would send you to Noyers. Leave me to manage it; he cannot eatme."

　　"Do you hear, mamma?"

　　"What?"

　　"/He/ is weeping still."

　　"Go to bed, my daughter; you will take cold in your feet: the floor isdamp."

　　*****

　　Thus passed the solemn day which was destined to weight upon the wholelife of the rich and poor heiress, whose sleep was never again to beso calm, nor yet so pure, as it had been up to this moment. It oftenhappens that certain actions of human life seem, literally speaking,improbable, though actual. Is not this because we constantly omit toturn the stream of psychological light upon our impulsivedeterminations, and fail to explain the subtile reasons, mysteriouslyconceived in our minds, which impelled them? Perhaps Eugenie's deeppassion should be analyzed in its most delicate fibres; for it became,scoffers might say, a malady which influenced her whole existence.Many people prefer to deny results rather than estimate the force ofties and links and bonds, which secretly join one fact to another inthe moral order. Here, therefore, Eugenie's past life will offer toobservers of human nature an explanation of her naive want ofreflection and the suddenness of the emotions which overflowed hersoul. The more tranquil her life had been, the more vivid was herwomanly pity, the more simple-minded were the sentiments now developedin her soul.

　　Made restless by the events of the day, she woke at intervals tolisten to her cousin, thinking she heard the sighs which still echoedin her heart. Sometimes she saw him dying of his trouble, sometimesshe dreamed that he fainted from hunger. Towards morning she wascertain that she heard a startling cry. She dressed at once and ran,in the dawning light, with a swift foot to her cousin's chamber, thedoor of which he had left open. The candle had burned down to thesocket. Charles, overcome by nature, was sleeping, dressed and sittingin an armchair beside the bed, on which his head rested; he dreamed asmen dream on an empty stomach. Eugenie might weep at her ease; shemight admire the young and handsome face blotted with grief, the eyesswollen with weeping, that seemed, sleeping as they were, to wellforth tears. Charles felt sympathetically the young girl's presence;he opened his eyes and saw her pitying him.

　　"Pardon me, my cousin," he said, evidently not knowing the hour northe place in which he found himself.

　　"There are hearts who hear you, cousin, and /we/ thought you mightneed something. You should go to bed; you tire yourself by sittingthus."

　　"That is true."

　　"Well, then, adieu!"

　　She escaped, ashamed and happy at having gone there. Innocence alonecan dare to be so bold. Once enlightened, virtue makes hercalculations as well as vice. Eugenie, who had not trembled beside hercousin, could scarcely stand upon her legs when she regained herchamber. Her ignorant life had suddenly come to an end; she reasoned,she rebuked herself with many reproaches.

　　"What will he think of me? He will think that I love him!"That was what she most wished him to think. An honest love has its ownprescience, and knows that love begets love. What an event for thispoor solitary girl thus to have entered the chamber of a young man!Are there not thoughts and actions in the life of love which tocertain souls bear the full meaning of the holiest espousals? An hourlater she went to her mother and dressed her as usual. Then they bothcame down and sat in their places before the window waiting forGrandet, with that cruel anxiety which, according to the individualcharacter, freezes the heart or warms it, shrivels or dilates it, whena scene is feared, a punishment expected,--a feeling so natural thateven domestic animals possess it, and whine at the slightest pain ofpunishment, though they make no outcry when they inadvertently hurtthemselves. The goodman came down; but he spoke to his wife with anabsent manner, kissed Eugenie, and sat down to table without appearingto remember his threats of the night before.

　　"What has become of my nephew? The lad gives no trouble.""Monsieur, he is asleep," answered Nanon.

　　"So much the better; he won't want a wax candle," said Grandet in ajeering tone.

　　This unusual clemency, this bitter gaiety, struck Madame Grandet withamazement, and she looked at her husband attentively. The goodman--here it may be well to explain that in Touraine, Anjou, Pitou, andBretagne the word "goodman," already used to designate Grandet, isbestowed as often upon harsh and cruel men as upon those of kindlytemperament, when either have reached a certain age; the title meansnothing on the score of individual gentleness--the goodman took hishat and gloves, saying as he went out,--

　　"I am going to loiter about the market-place and find Cruchot.""Eugenie, your father certainly has something on his mind."Grandet, who was a poor sleeper, employed half his nights in thepreliminary calculations which gave such astonishing accuracy to hisviews and observations and schemes, and secured to them the unfailingsuccess at sight of which his townsmen stood amazed. All human poweris a compound of time and patience. Powerful beings will and wait. Thelife of a miser is the constant exercise of human power put to theservice of self. It rests on two sentiments only,--self-love and self-interest; but self-interest being to a certain extent compact andintelligent self-love, the visible sign of real superiority, itfollows that self-love and self-interest are two parts of the samewhole,--egotism. From this arises, perhaps, the excessive curiosityshown in the habits of a miser's life whenever they are put before theworld. Every nature holds by a thread to those beings who challengeall human sentiments by concentrating all in one passion. Where is theman without desire? and what social desire can be satisfied withoutmoney?

　　Grandet unquestionably "had something on his mind," to use his wife'sexpression. There was in him, as in all misers, a persistent cravingto play a commercial game with other men and win their money legally.To impose upon other people was to him a sign of power, a perpetualproof that he had won the right to despise those feeble beings whosuffer themselves to be preyed upon in this world. Oh! who has evertruly understood the lamb lying peacefully at the feet of God?--touching emblem of all terrestrial victims, myth of their future,suffering and weakness glorified! This lamb it is which the miserfattens, puts in his fold, slaughters, cooks, eats, and then despises.The pasture of misers is compounded of money and disdain. During thenight Grandet's ideas had taken another course, which was the reasonof his sudden clemency. He had hatched a plot by which to trick theParisians, to decoy and dupe and snare them, to drive them into atrap, and make them go and come and sweat and hope and turn pale,--aplot by which to amuse himself, the old provincial cooper, sittingthere beneath his gloomy rafters, or passing up and down the rottenstaircase of his house in Saumur. His nephew filled his mind. Hewished to save the honor of his dead brother without the cost of apenny to the son or to himself. His own funds he was about to investfor three years; he had therefore nothing further to do than to managehis property in Saumur. He needed some nutriment for his maliciousactivity, and he found it suddenly in his brother's failure. Feelingnothing to squeeze between his own paws, he resolved to crush theParisians in behalf of Charles, and to play the part of a good brotheron the cheapest terms. The honor of the family counted for so littlein this scheme that his good intentions might be likened to theinterest a gambler takes in seeing a game well played in which he hasno stake. The Cruchots were a necessary part of his plan; but he wouldnot seek them,--he resolved to make them come to him, and to lead upthat very evening to a comedy whose plot he had just conceived, whichshould make him on the morrow an object of admiration to the wholetown without its costing him a single penny.

　　In her father's absence Eugenie had the happiness of busying herselfopenly with her much-loved cousin, of spending upon him fearlessly thetreasures of her pity,--woman's sublime superiority, the sole shedesires to have recognized, the sole she pardons man for letting herassume. Three or four times the young girl went to listen to hercousin's breathing, to know if he were sleeping or awake; then, whenhe had risen, she turned her thoughts to the cream, the eggs, thefruits, the plates, the glasses,--all that was a part of his breakfastbecame the object of some special care. At length she ran lightly upthe old staircase to listen to the noise her cousin made. Was hedressing? Did he still weep? She reached the door.

　　"My cousin!"

　　"Yes, cousin."

　　"Will you breakfast downstairs, or in your room?"

　　"Where you like."

　　"How do you feel?"

　　"Dear cousin, I am ashamed of being hungry."

　　This conversation, held through the closed door, was like an episodein a poem to Eugenie.

　　"Well, then, we will bring your breakfast to your own room, so as notto annoy my father."

　　She ran to the kitchen with the swiftness and lightness of a bird."Nanon, go and do his room!"

　　That staircase, so often traversed, which echoed to the slightestnoise, now lost its decaying aspect in the eyes of Eugenie. It grewluminous; it had a voice and spoke to her; it was young like herself,--young like the love it was now serving. Her mother, her kind,indulgent mother, lent herself to the caprices of the child's love,and after the room was put in order, both went to sit with the unhappyyouth and keep him company. Does not Christian charity makeconsolation a duty? The two women drew a goodly number of littlesophistries from their religion wherewith to justify their conduct.Charles was made the object of the tenderest and most loving care. Hissaddened heart felt the sweetness of the gentle friendship, theexquisite sympathy which these two souls, crushed under perpetualrestraint, knew so well how to display when, for an instant, they wereleft unfettered in the regions of suffering, their natural sphere.Claiming the right of relationship, Eugenie began to fold the linenand put in order the toilet articles which Charles had brought; thusshe could marvel at her ease over each luxurious bauble and thevarious knick-knacks of silver or chased gold, which she held long inher hand under a pretext of examining them. Charles could not seewithout emotion the generous interest his aunt and cousin felt in him;he knew society in Paris well enough to feel assured that, placed ashe now was, he would find all hearts indifferent or cold. Eugenie thusappeared to him in the splendor of a special beauty, and fromthenceforth he admired the innocence of life and manners which theprevious evening he had been inclined to ridicule. So when Eugenietook from Nanon the bowl of coffee and cream, and began to pour it outfor her cousin with the simplicity of real feeling, giving him akindly glance, the eyes of the Parisian filled with tears; he took herhand and kissed it.

　　"What troubles you?" she said.

　　"Oh! these are tears of gratitude," he answered.

　　Eugenie turned abruptly to the chimney-piece to take the candlesticks."Here, Nanon, carry them away!" she said.

　　When she looked again towards her cousin she was still blushing, buther looks could at least deceive, and did not betray the excess of joywhich innundated her heart; yet the eyes of both expressed the samesentiment as their souls flowed together in one thought,--the futurewas theirs. This soft emotion was all the more precious to Charles inthe midst of his heavy grief because it was wholly unexpected. Thesound of the knocker recalled the women to their usual station.Happily they were able to run downstairs with sufficient rapidity tobe seated at their work when Grandet entered; had he met them underthe archway it would have been enough to rouse his suspicions. Afterbreakfast, which the goodman took standing, the keeper from Froidfond,to whom the promised indemnity had never yet been paid, made hisappearance, bearing a hare and some partridges shot in the park, witheels and two pike sent as tribute by the millers.

　　"Ha, ha! poor Cornoiller; here he comes, like fish in Lent. Is allthat fit to eat?"

　　"Yes, my dear, generous master; it has been killed two days.""Come, Nanon, bestir yourself," said Grandet; "take these things,they'll do for dinner. I have invited the two Cruchots."

　　Nanon opened her eyes, stupid with amazement, and looked at everybodyin the room.

　　"Well!" she said, "and how am I to get the lard and the spices?""Wife," said Grandet, "give Nanon six francs, and remind me to getsome of the good wine out of the cellar."

　　"Well, then, Monsieur Grandet," said the keeper, who had come preparedwith an harangue for the purpose of settling the question of theindemnity, "Monsieur Grandet--"

　　"Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet; "I know what you want to say. You area good fellow; we will see about it to-morrow, I'm too busy to-day.Wife, give him five francs," he added to Madame Grandet as hedecamped.

　　The poor woman was only too happy to buy peace at the cost of elevenfrancs. She knew that Grandet would let her alone for a fortnightafter he had thus taken back, franc by franc, the money he had givenher.

　　"Here, Cornoiller," she said, slipping ten francs into the man's hand,"some day we will reward your services."

　　Cornoiller could say nothing, so he went away.

　　"Madame," said Nanon, who had put on her black coif and taken herbasket, "I want only three francs. You keep the rest; it'll go fastenough somehow."

　　"Have a good dinner, Nanon; my cousin will come down," said Eugenie."Something very extraordinary is going on, I am certain of it," saidMadame Grandet. "This is only the third time since our marriage thatyour father has given a dinner."

　　*****

　　About four o'clock, just as Eugenie and her mother had finishedsetting the table for six persons, and after the master of the househad brought up a few bottles of the exquisite wine which provincialscherish with true affection, Charles came down into the hall. Theyoung fellow was pale; his gestures, the expression of his face, hisglance, and the tones of his voice, all had a sadness which was fullof grace. He was not pretending grief, he truly suffered; and the veilof pain cast over his features gave him an interesting air dear to theheart of women. Eugenie loved him the more for it. Perhaps she feltthat sorrow drew him nearer to her. Charles was no longer the rich anddistinguished young man placed in a sphere far above her, but arelation plunged into frightful misery. Misery begets equality. Womenhave this in common with the angels,--suffering humanity belongs tothem. Charles and Eugenie understood each other and spoke only withtheir eyes; for the poor fallen dandy, orphaned and impoverished, satapart in a corner of the room, and was proudly calm and silent. Yet,from time to time, the gentle and caressing glance of the young girlshone upon him and constrained him away from his sad thoughts, drawinghim with her into the fields of hope and of futurity, where she lovedto hold him at her side.

　　VII

　　At this moment the town of Saumur was more excited about the dinnergiven by Grandet to the Cruchots than it had been the night before atthe sale of his vintage, though that constituted a crime of high-treason against the whole wine-growing community. If the politic oldmiser had given his dinner from the same idea that cost the dog ofAlcibiades his tail, he might perhaps have been called a great man;but the fact is, considering himself superior to a community which hecould trick on all occasions, he paid very little heed to what Saumurmight say.

　　The des Grassins soon learned the facts of the failure and the violentdeath of Guillaume Grandet, and they determined to go to theirclient's house that very evening to commiserate his misfortune andshow him some marks of friendship, with a view of ascertaining themotives which had led him to invite the Cruchots to dinner. Atprecisely five o'clock Monsieur C. de Bonfons and his uncle the notaryarrived in their Sunday clothes. The party sat down to table and beganto dine with good appetites. Grandet was grave, Charles silent,Eugenie dumb, and Madame Grandet did not say more than usual; so thatthe dinner was, very properly, a repast of condolence. When they rosefrom table Charles said to his aunt and uncle,--

　　"Will you permit me to retire? I am obliged to undertake a long andpainful correspondence."

　　"Certainly, nephew."

　　As soon as the goodman was certain that Charles could hear nothing andwas probably deep in his letter-writing, he said, with a dissimulatingglance at his wife,--

　　"Madame Grandet, what we have to talk about will be Latin to you; itis half-past seven; you can go and attend to your household accounts.Good-night, my daughter."

　　He kissed Eugenie, and the two women departed. A scene now took placein which Pere Grandet brought to bear, more than at any other momentof his life, the shrewd dexterity he had acquired in his intercoursewith men, and which had won him from those whose flesh he sometimesbit too sharply the nickname of "the old dog." If the mayor of Saumurhad carried his ambition higher still, if fortunate circumstances,drawing him towards the higher social spheres, had sent him intocongresses where the affairs of nations were discussed, and had hethere employed the genius with which his personal interests hadendowed him, he would undoubtedly have proved nobly useful to hisnative land. Yet it is perhaps equally certain that outside of Saumurthe goodman would have cut a very sorry figure. Possibly there areminds like certain animals which cease to breed when transplanted fromthe climates in which they are born.

　　"M-m-mon-sieur le p-p-president, you said t-t-that b-b-bankruptcy--"The stutter which for years the old miser had assumed when it suitedhim, and which, together with the deafness of which he sometimescomplained in rainy weather, was thought in Saumur to be a naturaldefect, became at this crisis so wearisome to the two Cruchots thatwhile they listened they unconsciously made faces and moved theirlips, as if pronouncing the words over which he was hesitating andstuttering at will. Here it may be well to give the history of thisimpediment of the speech and hearing of Monsieur Grandet. No one inAnjou heard better, or could pronounce more crisply the Frenchlanguage (with an Angevin accent) than the wily old cooper. Some yearsearlier, in spite of his shrewdness, he had been taken in by anIsraelite, who in the course of the discussion held his hand behindhis ear to catch sounds, and mangled his meaning so thoroughly intrying to utter his words that Grandet fell a victim to his humanityand was compelled to prompt the wily Jew with the words and ideas heseemed to seek, to complete himself the arguments of the said Jew, tosay what that cursed Jew ought to have said for himself; in short, tobe the Jew instead of being Grandet. When the cooper came out of thiscurious encounter he had concluded the only bargain of which in thecourse of a long commercial life he ever had occasion to complain. Butif he lost at the time pecuniarily, he gained morally a valuablelesson; later, he gathered its fruits. Indeed, the goodman ended byblessing that Jew for having taught him the art of irritating hiscommercial antagonist and leading him to forget his own thoughts inhis impatience to suggest those over which his tormentor wasstuttering. No affair had ever needed the assistance of deafness,impediments of speech, and all the incomprehensible circumlocutionswith which Grandet enveloped his ideas, as much as the affair now inhand. In the first place, he did not mean to shoulder theresponsibility of his own scheme; in the next, he was determined toremain master of the conversation and to leave his real intentions indoubt.

　　"M-m-monsieur de B-B-Bonfons,"--for the second time in three yearsGrandet called the Cruchot nephew Monsieur de Bonfons; the presidentfelt he might consider himself the artful old fellow's son-in-law,--"you-ou said th-th-that b-b-bankruptcy c-c-could, in some c-c-cases,b-b-be p-p-prevented b-b-by--"

　　"By the courts of commerce themselves. It is done constantly," saidMonsieur C. de Bonfons, bestriding Grandet's meaning, or thinking heguessed it, and kindly wishing to help him out with it. "Listen.""Y-yes," said Grandet humbly, with the mischievous expression of a boywho is inwardly laughing at his teacher while he pays him the greatestattention.

　　"When a man so respected and important as, for example, your latebrother--"

　　"M-my b-b-brother, yes."

　　"--is threatened with insolvency--"

　　"They c-c-call it in-ins-s-solvency?"

　　"Yes; when his failure is imminent, the court of commerce, to which heis amenable (please follow me attentively), has the power, by adecree, to appoint a receiver. Liquidation, you understand, is not thesame as failure. When a man fails, he is dishonored; but when hemerely liquidates, he remains an honest man."

　　"T-t-that's very d-d-different, if it d-d-doesn't c-c-cost m-m-more,"said Grandet.

　　"But a liquidation can be managed without having recourse to thecourts at all. For," said the president, sniffing a pinch of snuff,"don't you know how failures are declared?"

　　"N-n-no, I n-n-never t-t-thought," answered Grandet.

　　"In the first place," resumed the magistrate, "by filing the schedulein the record office of the court, which the merchant may do himself,or his representative for him with a power of attorney duly certified.In the second place, the failure may be declared under compulsion fromthe creditors. Now if the merchant does not file his schedule, and ifno creditor appears before the courts to obtain a decree of insolvencyagainst the merchant, what happens?"

　　"W-w-what h-h-happens?"

　　"Why, the family of the deceased, his representatives, his heirs, orthe merchant himself, if he is not dead, or his friends if he is onlyhiding, liquidate his business. Perhaps you would like to liquidateyour brother's affairs?"

　　"Ah! Grandet," said the notary, "that would be the right thing to do.There is honor down here in the provinces. If you save your name--forit is your name--you will be a man--"

　　"A noble man!" cried the president, interrupting his uncle."Certainly," answered the old man, "my b-b-brother's name wasG-G-Grandet, like m-m-mine. Th-that's c-c-certain; I d-d-don'td-d-deny it. And th-th-this l-l-liquidation might be, in m-m-manyways, v-v-very advan-t-t-tageous t-t-to the interests of m-m-myn-n-nephew, whom I l-l-love. But I must consider. I don't k-k-know thet-t-tricks of P-P-Paris. I b-b-belong to Sau-m-mur, d-d-don't you see?M-m-my vines, my d-d-drains--in short, I've my own b-b-business. Inever g-g-give n-n-notes. What are n-n-notes? I t-t-take a goodm-m-many, but I have never s-s-signed one. I d-d-don't understand suchthings. I have h-h-heard say that n-n-notes c-c-can be b-b-bought up.""Of course," said the president. "Notes can be bought in the market,less so much per cent. Don't you understand?"

　　Grandet made an ear-trumpet of his hand, and the president repeatedhis words.

　　"Well, then," replied the man, "there's s-s-something to be g-g-gotout of it? I k-know n-nothing at my age about such th-th-things. Il-l-live here and l-l-look after the v-v-vines. The vines g-g-grow,and it's the w-w-wine that p-p-pays. L-l-look after the v-v-vintage,t-t-that's my r-r-rule. My c-c-chief interests are at Froidfond. Ic-c-can't l-l-leave my h-h-house to m-m-muddle myself with ad-d-devilish b-b-business I kn-know n-n-nothing about. You say I oughtto l-l-liquidate my b-b-brother's af-f-fairs, to p-p-prevent thef-f-failure. I c-c-can't be in two p-p-places at once, unless I were alittle b-b-bird, and--"

　　"I understand," cried the notary. "Well, my old friend, you havefriends, old friends, capable of devoting themselves to yourinterests."

　　"All right!" thought Grandet, "make haste and come to the point!""Suppose one of them went to Paris and saw your brother Guillaume'schief creditor and said to him--"

　　"One m-m-moment," interrupted the goodman, "said wh-wh-what? Somethingl-l-like this. Monsieur Gr-Grandet of Saumur this, Monsieur Grandet ofSaumur that. He l-loves his b-b-brother, he loves his n-nephew.Grandet is a g-g-good uncle; he m-m-means well. He has sold hisv-v-vintage. D-d-don't declare a f-f-failure; c-c-call a meeting;l-l-liquidate; and then Gr-Gr-Grandet will see what he c-c-can do.B-b-better liquidate than l-let the l-l-law st-st-stick its n-n-nosein. Hein? isn't it so?"

　　"Exactly so," said the president.

　　"B-because, don't you see, Monsieur de B-Bonfons, a man must l-l-lookb-b-before he l-leaps. If you c-c-can't, you c-c-can't. M-m-must knowall about the m-m-matter, all the resources and the debts, if youd-d-don't want to be r-r-ruined. Hein? isn't it so?"

　　"Certainly," said the president. "I'm of opinion that in a few monthsthe debts might be bought up for a certain sum, and then paid in fullby an agreement. Ha! ha! you can coax a dog a long way if you show hima bit of lard. If there has been no declaration of failure, and youhold a lien on the debts, you come out of the business as white as thedriven snow."

　　"Sn-n-now," said Grandet, putting his hand to his ear, "wh-wh-whatabout s-now?"

　　"But," cried the president, "do pray attend to what I am saying.""I am at-t-tending."

　　"A note is merchandise,--an article of barter which rises and falls inprices. That is a deduction from Jeremy Bentham's theory about usury.That writer has proved that the prejudice which condemned usurers toreprobation was mere folly."

　　"Whew!" ejaculated the goodman.

　　"Allowing that money, according to Bentham, is an article ofmerchandise, and that whatever represents money is equallymerchandise," resumed the president; "allowing also that it isnotorious that the commercial note, bearing this or that signature, isliable to the fluctuation of all commercial values, rises or falls inthe market, is dear at one moment, and is worth nothing at another,the courts decide--ah! how stupid I am, I beg your pardon--I aminclined to think you could buy up your brother's debts for twenty-five per cent."

　　"D-d-did you c-c-call him Je-Je-Jeremy B-Ben?"

　　"Bentham, an Englishman.'

　　"That's a Jeremy who might save us a lot of lamentations in business,"said the notary, laughing.

　　"Those Englishmen s-sometimes t-t-talk sense," said Grandet. "So,ac-c-cording to Ben-Bentham, if my b-b-brother's n-notes are worthn-n-nothing; if Je-Je--I'm c-c-correct, am I not? That seems c-c-clearto my m-m-mind--the c-c-creditors would be--No, would not be; Iunderstand."

　　"Let me explain it all," said the president. "Legally, if you acquirea title to all the debts of the Maison Grandet, your brother or hisheirs will owe nothing to any one. Very good."

　　"Very g-good," repeated Grandet.

　　"In equity, if your brother's notes are negotiated--negotiated, do youclearly understand the term?--negotiated in the market at a reductionof so much per cent in value, and if one of your friends happening tobe present should buy them in, the creditors having sold them of theirown free-will without constraint, the estate of the late Grandet ishonorably released."

　　"That's t-true; b-b-business is b-business," said the cooper."B-b-but, st-still, you know, it is d-d-difficult. I h-have n-nom-m-money and n-no t-t-time."

　　"Yes, but you need not undertake it. I am quite ready to go to Paris(you may pay my expenses, they will only be a trifle). I will see thecreditors and talk with them and get an extension of time, andeverything can be arranged if you will add something to the assets soas to buy up all title to the debts."

　　"We-we'll see about th-that. I c-c-can't and I w-w-won't bind myselfwithout--He who c-c-can't, can't; don't you see?"

　　"That's very true."

　　"I'm all p-p-put ab-b-bout by what you've t-t-told me. This is thef-first t-t-time in my life I have b-been obliged to th-th-think--""Yes, you are not a lawyer."

　　"I'm only a p-p-poor wine-g-grower, and know n-nothing about wh-whatyou have just t-told me; I m-m-must th-think about it."

　　"Very good," said the president, preparing to resume his argument."Nephew!" said the notary, interrupting him in a warning tone."Well, what, uncle?" answered the president.

　　"Let Monsieur Grandet explain his own intentions. The matter inquestion is of the first importance. Our good friend ought to definehis meaning clearly, and--"

　　A loud knock, which announced the arrival of the des Grassins family,succeeded by their entrance and salutations, hindered Cruchot fromconcluding his sentence. The notary was glad of the interruption, forGrandet was beginning to look suspiciously at him, and the wen gavesigns of a brewing storm. In the first place, the notary did not thinkit becoming in a president of the Civil courts to go to Paris andmanipulate creditors and lend himself to an underhand job whichclashed with the laws of strict integrity; moreover, never havingknown old Grandet to express the slightest desire to pay anything, nomatter what, he instinctively feared to see his nephew taking part inthe affair. He therefore profited by the entrance of the des Grassinsto take the nephew by the arm and lead him into the embrasure of thewindow,--

　　"You have said enough, nephew; you've shown enough devotion. Yourdesire to win the girl blinds you. The devil! you mustn't go at ittooth and nail. Let me sail the ship now; you can haul on the braces.Do you think it right to compromise your dignity as a magistrate insuch a--"

　　He stopped, for he heard Monsieur des Grassins saying to the oldcooper as they shook hands,--

　　"Grandet, we have heard of the frightful misfortunes which have justbefallen your family,--the failure of the house of Guillaume Grandetand the death of your brother. We have come to express our grief atthese sad events."

　　"There is but one sad event," said the notary, interrupting thebanker,--"the death of Monsieur Grandet, junior; and he would neverhave killed himself had he thought in time of applying to his brotherfor help. Our old friend, who is honorable to his finger-nails,intends to liquidate the debts of the Maison Grandet of Paris. To savehim the worry of legal proceedings, my nephew, the president, has justoffered to go to Paris and negotiate with the creditors for asatisfactory settlement."

　　These words, corroborated by Grandet's attitude as he stood silentlynursing his chin, astonished the three des Grassins, who had beenleisurely discussing the old man's avarice as they came along, verynearly accusing him of fratricide.

　　"Ah! I was sure of it," cried the banker, looking at his wife. "Whatdid I tell you just now, Madame des Grassins? Grandet is honorable tothe backbone, and would never allow his name to remain under theslightest cloud! Money without honor is a disease. There is honor inthe provinces! Right, very right, Grandet. I'm an old soldier, and Ican't disguise my thoughts; I speak roughly. Thunder! it is sublime!""Th-then s-s-sublime th-things c-c-cost d-dear," answered the goodman,as the banker warmly wrung his hand.

　　"But this, my dear Grandet,--if the president will excuse me,--is apurely commercial matter, and needs a consummate business man. Youragent must be some one fully acquainted with the markets,--withdisbursements, rebates, interest calculations, and so forth. I amgoing to Paris on business of my own, and I can take charge of--""We'll see about t-t-trying to m-m-manage it b-b-between us, under thep-p-peculiar c-c-circumstances, b-b-but without b-b-binding m-m-myselfto anything th-that I c-c-could not do," said Grandet, stuttering;"because, you see, monsieur le president naturally expects me to paythe expenses of his journey."

　　The goodman did not stammer over the last words.

　　"Eh!" cried Madame des Grassins, "why it is a pleasure to go to Paris.I would willingly pay to go myself."

　　She made a sign to her husband, as if to encourage him in cutting theenemy out of the commission, /coute que coute/; then she glancedironically at the two Cruchots, who looked chap-fallen. Grandet seizedthe banker by a button and drew him into a corner of the room."I have a great deal more confidence in you than in the president," hesaid; "besides, I've other fish to fry," he added, wriggling his wen."I want to buy a few thousand francs in the Funds while they are ateighty. They fall, I'm told, at the end of each month. You know allabout these things, don't you?"

　　"Bless me! then, am I to invest enough to give you a few thousandfrancs a year?"

　　"That's not much to begin with. Hush! I don't want any one to know Iam going to play that game. You can make the investment by the end ofthe month. Say nothing to the Cruchots; that'll annoy them. If you arereally going to Paris, we will see if there is anything to be done formy poor nephew."

　　"Well, it's all settled. I'll start to-morrow by the mail-post," saiddes Grassins aloud, "and I will come and take your last directions at--what hour will suit you?"

　　"Five o'clock, just before dinner," said Grandet, rubbing his hands.The two parties stayed on for a short time. Des Grassins said, after apause, striking Grandet on the shoulder,--

　　"It is a good thing to have a relation like him."

　　"Yes, yes; without making a show," said Grandet, "I am a g-goodrelation. I loved my brother, and I will prove it, unless itc-c-costs--"

　　"We must leave you, Grandet," said the banker, interrupting himfortunately before he got to the end of his sentence. "If I hurry mydeparture, I must attend to some matters at once."

　　"Very good, very good! I myself--in c-consequence of what I t-told you--I must retire to my own room and 'd-d-deliberate,' as PresidentCruchot says."

　　"Plague take him! I am no longer Monsieur de Bonfons," thought themagistrate ruefully, his face assuming the expression of a judge boredby an argument.

　　The heads of the two factions walked off together. Neither gave anyfurther thought to the treachery Grandet had been guilty of in themorning against the whole wine-growing community; each tried to fathomwhat the other was thinking about the real intentions of the wily oldman in this new affair, but in vain.

　　"Will you go with us to Madame Dorsonval's?" said des Grassins to thenotary.

　　"We will go there later," answered the president. "I have promised tosay good-evening to Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt, and we will go therefirst, if my uncle is willing."

　　"Farewell for the present!" said Madame des Grassins.

　　When the Cruchots were a few steps off, Adolphe remarked to hisfather,--

　　"Are not they fuming, hein?"

　　"Hold your tongue, my son!" said his mother; "they might hear you.Besides, what you say is not in good taste,--law-school language.""Well, uncle," cried the president when he saw the des Grassinsdisappearing, "I began by being de Bonfons, and I have ended asnothing but Cruchot."

　　"I saw that that annoyed you; but the wind has set fair for the desGrassins. What a fool you are, with all your cleverness! Let them sailoff on Grandet's 'We'll see about it,' and keep yourself quiet, youngman. Eugenie will none the less be your wife."

　　In a few moments the news of Grandet's magnanimous resolve wasdisseminated in three houses at the same moment, and the whole townbegan to talk of his fraternal devotion. Every one forgave Grandet forthe sale made in defiance of the good faith pledged to the community;they admired his sense of honor, and began to laud a generosity ofwhich they had never thought him capable. It is part of the Frenchnature to grow enthusiastic, or angry, or fervent about some meteor ofthe moment. Can it be that collective beings, nationalities, peoples,are devoid of memory?

　　When Pere Grandet had shut the door he called Nanon.

　　"Don't let the dog loose, and don't go to bed; we have work to dotogether. At eleven o'clock Cornoiller will be at the door with thechariot from Froidfond. Listen for him and prevent his knocking; tellhim to come in softly. Police regulations don't allow nocturnalracket. Besides, the whole neighborhood need not know that I amstarting on a journey."

　　So saying, Grandet returned to his private room, where Nanon heard himmoving about, rummaging, and walking to and fro, though with muchprecaution, for he evidently did not wish to wake his wife anddaughter, and above all not to rouse the attention of his nephew, whomhe had begun to anathematize when he saw a thread of light under hisdoor. About the middle of the night Eugenie, intent on her cousin,fancied she heard a cry like that of a dying person. It must beCharles, she thought; he was so pale, so full of despair when she hadseen him last,--could he have killed himself? She wrapped herselfquickly in a loose garment,--a sort of pelisse with a hood,--and wasabout to leave the room when a bright light coming through the chinksof her door made her think of fire. But she recovered herself as sheheard Nanon's heavy steps and gruff voice mingling with the snortingof several horses.

　　"Can my father be carrying off my cousin?" she said to herself,opening her door with great precaution lest it should creak, and yetenough to let her see into the corridor.

　　Suddenly her eye encountered that of her father; and his glance, vagueand unnoticing as it was, terrified her. The goodman and Nanon wereyoked together by a stout stick, each end of which rested on theirshoulders; a stout rope was passed over it, on which was slung a smallbarrel or keg like those Pere Grandet still made in his bakehouse asan amusement for his leisure hours.

　　"Holy Virgin, how heavy it is!" said the voice of Nanon.

　　"What a pity that it is only copper sous!" answered Grandet. "Takecare you don't knock over the candlestick."

　　The scene was lighted by a single candle placed between two rails ofthe staircase.

　　"Cornoiller," said Grandet to his keeper /in partibus/, "have youbrought your pistols?"

　　"No, monsieur. Mercy! what's there to fear for your copper sous?""Oh! nothing," said Pere Grandet.

　　"Besides, we shall go fast," added the man; "your farmers have pickedout their best horses."

　　"Very good. You did not tell them where I was going?"

　　"I didn't know where."

　　"Very good. Is the carriage strong?"

　　"Strong? hear to that, now! Why, it can carry three thousand weight.How much does that old keg weigh?"

　　"Goodness!" exclaimed Nanon. "I ought to know! There's pretty nigheighteen hundred--"

　　"Will you hold your tongue, Nanon! You are to tell my wife I have goneinto the country. I shall be back to dinner. Drive fast, Cornoiller; Imust get to Angers before nine o'clock."

　　The carriage drove off. Nanon bolted the great door, let loose thedog, and went off to bed with a bruised shoulder, no one in theneighborhood suspecting either the departure of Grandet or the objectof his journey. The precautions of the old miser and his reticencewere never relaxed. No one had ever seen a penny in that house, filledas it was with gold. Hearing in the morning, through the gossip of theport, that exchange on gold had doubled in price in consequence ofcertain military preparations undertaken at Nantes, and thatspeculators had arrived at Angers to buy coin, the old wine-grower, bythe simple process of borrowing horses from his farmers, seized thechance of selling his gold and of bringing back in the form oftreasury notes the sum he intended to put into the Funds, havingswelled it considerably by the exchange.

　　VIII

　　"My father has gone," thought Eugenie, who heard all that took placefrom the head of the stairs. Silence was restored in the house, andthe distant rumbling of the carriage, ceasing by degrees, no longerechoed through the sleeping town. At this moment Eugenie heard in herheart, before the sound caught her ears, a cry which pierced thepartitions and came from her cousin's chamber. A line of light, thinas the blade of a sabre, shone through a chink in the door and fellhorizontally on the balusters of the rotten staircase.

　　"He suffers!" she said, springing up the stairs. A second moan broughther to the landing near his room. The door was ajar, she pushed itopen. Charles was sleeping; his head hung over the side of the oldarmchair, and his hand, from which the pen had fallen, nearly touchedthe floor. The oppressed breathing caused by the strained posturesuddenly frightened Eugenie, who entered the room hastily."He must be very tired," she said to herself, glancing at a dozenletters lying sealed upon the table. She read their addresses: "ToMessrs. Farry, Breilmann, & Co., carriage-makers"; "To MonsieurBuisson, tailor," etc.

　　"He has been settling all his affairs, so as to leave France at once,"she thought. Her eyes fell upon two open letters. The words, "My dearAnnette," at the head of one of them, blinded her for a moment. Herheart beat fast, her feet were nailed to the floor.

　　"His dear Annette! He loves! he is loved! No hope! What does he say toher?"

　　These thoughts rushed through her head and heart. She saw the wordseverywhere, even on the bricks of the floor, in letters of fire."Resign him already? No, no! I will not read the letter. I ought to goaway--What if I do read it?"

　　She looked at Charles, then she gently took his head and placed itagainst the back of the chair; he let her do so, like a child which,though asleep, knows its mother's touch and receives, without awaking,her kisses and watchful care. Like a mother Eugenie raised thedrooping hand, and like a mother she gently kissed the chestnut hair--"Dear Annette!" a demon shrieked the words in her ear.

　　"I am doing wrong; but I must read it, that letter," she said. Sheturned away her head, for her noble sense of honor reproached her. Forthe first time in her life good and evil struggled together in herheart. Up to that moment she had never had to blush for any action.Passion and curiosity triumphed. As she read each sentence her heartswelled more and more, and the keen glow which filled her being as shedid so, only made the joys of first love still more precious.

　　My dear Annette,--Nothing could ever have separated us but the

　　great misfortune which has now overwhelmed me, and which no human

　　foresight could have prevented. My father has killed himself; his

　　fortune and mine are irretrievably lost. I am orphaned at an age

　　when, through the nature of my education, I am still a child; and

　　yet I must lift myself as a man out of the abyss into which I am

　　plunged. I have just spent half the night in facing my position.

　　If I wish to leave France an honest man,--and there is no doubt of

　　that,--I have not a hundred francs of my own with which to try my

　　fate in the Indies or in America. Yes, my poor Anna, I must seek

　　my fortune in those deadly climates. Under those skies, they tell

　　me, I am sure to make it. As for remaining in Paris, I cannot do

　　so. Neither my nature nor my face are made to bear the affronts,

　　the neglect, the disdain shown to a ruined man, the son of a

　　bankrupt! Good God! think of owing two millions! I should be

　　killed in a duel the first week; therefore I shall not return

　　there. Your love--the most tender and devoted love which ever

　　ennobled the heart of man--cannot draw me back. Alas! my beloved,

　　I have no money with which to go to you, to give and receive a

　　last kiss from which I might derive some strength for my forlorn

　　enterprise.

　　"Poor Charles! I did well to read the letter. I have gold; I will giveit to him," thought Eugenie.

　　She wiped her eyes, and went on reading.

　　I have never thought of the miseries of poverty. If I have the

　　hundred louis required for the mere costs of the journey, I have

　　not a sou for an outfit. But no, I have not the hundred louis, not

　　even one louis. I don't know that anything will be left after I

　　have paid my debts in Paris. If I have nothing, I shall go quietly

　　to Nantes and ship as a common sailor; and I will begin in the new

　　world like other men who have started young without a sou and

　　brought back the wealth of the Indies. During this long day I have

　　faced my future coolly. It seems more horrible for me than for

　　another, because I have been so petted by a mother who adored me,

　　so indulged by the kindest of fathers, so blessed by meeting, on

　　my entrance into life, with the love of an Anna! The flowers of

　　life are all I have ever known. Such happiness could not last.

　　Nevertheless, my dear Annette, I feel more courage than a careless

　　young man is supposed to feel,--above all a young man used to the

　　caressing ways of the dearest woman in all Paris, cradled in

　　family joys, on whom all things smiled in his home, whose wishes

　　were a law to his father--oh, my father! Annette, he is dead!

　　Well, I have thought over my position, and yours as well. I have

　　grown old in twenty-four hours. Dear Anna, if in order to keep me

　　with you in Paris you were to sacrifice your luxury, your dress,

　　your opera-box, we should even then not have enough for the

　　expenses of my extravagant ways of living. Besides, I would never

　　accept such sacrifices. No, we must part now and forever--"He gives her up! Blessed Virgin! What happiness!"

　　Eugenie quivered with joy. Charles made a movement, and a chill ofterror ran through her. Fortunately, he did not wake, and she resumedher reading.

　　When shall I return? I do not know. The climate of the West Indies

　　ages a European, so they say; especially a European who works

　　hard. Let us think what may happen ten years hence. In ten years

　　your daughter will be eighteen; she will be your companion, your

　　spy. To you society will be cruel, and your daughter perhaps more

　　cruel still. We have seen cases of the harsh social judgment and

　　ingratitude of daughters; let us take warning by them. Keep in the

　　depths of your soul, as I shall in mine, the memory of four years

　　of happiness, and be faithful, if you can, to the memory of your

　　poor friend. I cannot exact such faithfulness, because, do you

　　see, dear Annette, I must conform to the exigencies of my new

　　life; I must take a commonplace view of them and do the best I

　　can. Therefore I must think of marriage, which becomes one of the

　　necessities of my future existence; and I will admit to you that I

　　have found, here in Saumur, in my uncle's house, a cousin whose

　　face, manners, mind, and heart would please you, and who, besides,

　　seems to me--

　　"He must have been very weary to have ceased writing to her," thoughtEugenie, as she gazed at the letter which stopped abruptly in themiddle of the last sentence.

　　Already she defended him. How was it possible that an innocent girlshould perceive the cold-heartedness evinced by this letter? To younggirls religiously brought up, whose minds are ignorant and pure, allis love from the moment they set their feet within the enchantedregions of that passion. They walk there bathed in a celestial lightshed from their own souls, which reflects its rays upon their lover;they color all with the flame of their own emotion and attribute tohim their highest thoughts. A woman's errors come almost always fromher belief in good or her confidence in truth. In Eugenie's simpleheart the words, "My dear Annette, my loved one," echoed like thesweetest language of love; they caressed her soul as, in childhood,the divine notes of the /Venite adoremus/, repeated by the organ,caressed her ear. Moreover, the tears which still lingered on theyoung man's lashes gave signs of that nobility of heart by which younggirls are rightly won. How could she know that Charles, though heloved his father and mourned him truly, was moved far more by paternalgoodness than by the goodness of his own heart? Monsieur and MadameGuillaume Grandet, by gratifying every fancy of their son, andlavishing upon him the pleasures of a large fortune, had kept him frommaking the horrible calculations of which so many sons in Paris becomemore or less guilty when, face to face with the enjoyments of theworld, they form desires and conceive schemes which they see withbitterness must be put off or laid aside during the lifetime of theirparents. The liberality of the father in this instance had shed intothe heart of the son a real love, in which there was no afterthoughtof self-interest.

　　Nevertheless, Charles was a true child of Paris, taught by the customsof society and by Annette herself to calculate everything; already anold man under the mask of youth. He had gone through the frightfuleducation of social life, of that world where in one evening morecrimes are committed in thought and speech than justice ever punishesat the assizes; where jests and clever sayings assassinate the noblestideas; where no one is counted strong unless his mind sees clear: andto see clear in that world is to believe in nothing, neither infeelings, nor in men, nor even in events,--for events are falsified.There, to "see clear" we must weigh a friend's purse daily, learn howto keep ourselves adroitly on the top of the wave, cautiously admirenothing, neither works of art nor glorious actions, and remember thatself-interest is the mainspring of all things here below. Aftercommitting many follies, the great lady--the beautiful Annette--compelled Charles to think seriously; with her perfumed hand among hiscurls, she talked to him of his future position; as she rearranged hislocks, she taught him lessons of worldly prudence; she made himeffeminate and materialized him,--a double corruption, but a delicateand elegant corruption, in the best taste.

　　"You are very foolish, Charles," she would say to him. "I shall have agreat deal of trouble in teaching you to understand the world. Youbehaved extremely ill to Monsieur des Lupeaulx. I know very well he isnot an honorable man; but wait till he is no longer in power, then youmay despise him as much as you like. Do you know what Madame Campanused to tell us?--'My dears, as long as a man is a minister, adorehim; when he falls, help to drag him in the gutter. Powerful, he is asort of god; fallen, he is lower than Marat in the sewer, because heis living, and Marat is dead. Life is a series of combinations, andyou must study them and understand them if you want to keep yourselvesalways in good position.'"

　　Charles was too much a man of the world, his parents had made him toohappy, he had received too much adulation in society, to be possessedof noble sentiments. The grain of gold dropped by his mother into hisheart was beaten thin in the smithy of Parisian society; he had spreadit superficially, and it was worn away by the friction of life.Charles was only twenty-one years old. At that age the freshness ofyouth seems inseparable from candor and sincerity of soul. The voice,the glance, the face itself, seem in harmony with the feelings; andthus it happens that the sternest judge, the most sceptical lawyer,the least complying of usurers, always hesitate to admit decrepitudeof heart or the corruption of worldly calculation while the eyes arestill bathed in purity and no wrinkles seam the brow. Charles, so far,had had no occasion to apply the maxims of Parisian morality; up tothis time he was still endowed with the beauty of inexperience. Andyet, unknown to himself, he had been inoculated with selfishness. Thegerms of Parisian political economy, latent in his heart, wouldassuredly burst forth, sooner or later, whenever the carelessspectator became an actor in the drama of real life.

　　Nearly all young girls succumb to the tender promises such an outwardappearance seems to offer: even if Eugenie had been as prudent andobserving as provincial girls are often found to be, she was notlikely to distrust her cousin when his manners, words, and actionswere still in unison with the aspirations of a youthful heart. A merechance--a fatal chance--threw in her way the last effusions of realfeeling which stirred the young man's soul; she heard as it were thelast breathings of his conscience. She laid down the letter--to her sofull of love--and began smilingly to watch her sleeping cousin; thefresh illusions of life were still, for her at least, upon his face;she vowed to herself to love him always. Then she cast her eyes on theother letter, without attaching much importance to this secondindiscretion; and though she read it, it was only to obtain new proofsof the noble qualities which, like all women, she attributed to theman her heart had chosen.

　　My dear Alphonse,--When you receive this letter I shall be without

　　friends; but let me assure you that while I doubt the friendship

　　of the world, I have never doubted yours. I beg you therefore to

　　settle all my affairs, and I trust to you to get as much as you

　　can out of my possessions. By this time you know my situation. I

　　have nothing left, and I intend to go at once to the Indies. I

　　have just written to all the people to whom I think I owe money,

　　and you will find enclosed a list of their names, as correct as I

　　can make it from memory. My books, my furniture, my pictures, my

　　horses, etc., ought, I think, to pay my debts. I do not wish to

　　keep anything, except, perhaps, a few baubles which might serve as

　　the beginning of an outfit for my enterprise. My dear Alphonse, I

　　will send you a proper power of attorney under which you can make

　　these sales. Send me all my weapons. Keep Briton for yourself;

　　nobody would pay the value of that noble beast, and I would rather

　　give him to you--like a mourning-ring bequeathed by a dying man to

　　his executor. Farry, Breilmann, & Co. built me a very comfortable

　　travelling-carriage, which they have not yet delivered; persuade

　　them to keep it and not ask for any payment on it. If they refuse,

　　do what you can in the matter, and avoid everything that might

　　seem dishonorable in me under my present circumstances. I owe the

　　British Islander six louis, which I lost at cards; don't fail to

　　pay him--

　　"Dear cousin!" whispered Eugenie, throwing down the letter and runningsoftly back to her room, carrying one of the lighted candles. A thrillof pleasure passed over her as she opened the drawer of an old oakcabinet, a fine specimen of the period called the Renaissance, onwhich could still be seen, partly effaced, the famous royalsalamander. She took from the drawer a large purse of red velvet withgold tassels, edged with a tarnished fringe of gold wire,--a relicinherited from her grandmother. She weighed it proudly in her hand,and began with delight to count over the forgotten items of her littlehoard. First she took out twenty /portugaises/, still new, struck inthe reign of John V., 1725, worth by exchange, as her father told her,five /lisbonnines/, or a hundred and sixty-eight francs, sixty-fourcentimes each; their conventional value, however, was a hundred andeighty francs apiece, on account of the rarity and beauty of thecoins, which shone like little suns. Item, five /genovines/, or fivehundred-franc pieces of Genoa; another very rare coin worth eighty-seven francs on exchange, but a hundred francs to collectors. Thesehad formerly belonged to old Monsieur de la Bertelliere. Item, threegold /quadruples/, Spanish, of Philip V., struck in 1729, given to herone by one by Madame Gentillet, who never failed to say, using thesame words, when she made the gift, "This dear little canary, thislittle yellow-boy, is worth ninety-eight francs! Keep it, my prettyone, it will be the flower of your treasure." Item (that which herfather valued most of all, the gold of these coins being twenty-threecarats and a fraction), a hundred Dutch ducats, made in the year 1756,and worth thirteen francs apiece. Item, a great curiosity, a speciesof medal precious to the soul of misers,--three rupees with the signof the Scales, and five rupees with the sign of the Virgin, all inpure gold of twenty-four carats; the magnificent money of the GreatMogul, each of which was worth by mere weight thirty-seven francs,forty centimes, but at least fifty francs to those connoisseurs wholove to handle gold. Item, the napoleon of forty francs received theday before, which she had forgotten to put away in the velvet purse.This treasure was all in virgin coins, true works of art, whichGrandet from time to time inquired after and asked to see, pointingout to his daughter their intrinsic merits,--such as the beauty of themilled edge, the clearness of the flat surface, the richness of thelettering, whose angles were not yet rubbed off.

　　Eugenie gave no thought to these rarities, nor to her father's maniafor them, nor to the danger she incurred in depriving herself of atreasure so dear to him; no, she thought only of her cousin, and soonmade out, after a few mistakes of calculation, that she possessedabout five thousand eight hundred francs in actual value, which mightbe sold for their additional value to collectors for nearly sixthousand. She looked at her wealth and clapped her hands like a happychild forced to spend its overflowing joy in artless movements of thebody. Father and daughter had each counted up their fortune thisnight,--he, to sell his gold; Eugenie to fling hers into the ocean ofaffection. She put the pieces back into the old purse, took it in herhand, and ran upstairs without hesitation. The secret misery of hercousin made her forget the hour and conventional propriety; she wasstrong in her conscience, in her devotion, in her happiness.As she stood upon the threshold of the door, holding the candle in onehand and the purse in the other, Charles woke, caught sight of her,and remained speechless with surprise. Eugenie came forward, put thecandle on the table, and said in a quivering voice:

　　"My cousin, I must beg pardon for a wrong I have done you; but Godwill pardon me--if you--will help me to wipe it out."

　　"What is it?" asked Charles, rubbing his eyes.

　　"I have read those letters."

　　Charles colored.

　　"How did it happen?" she continued; "how came I here? Truly, I do notknow. I am tempted not to regret too much that I have read them; theyhave made me know your heart, your soul, and--"

　　"And what?" asked Charles.

　　"Your plans, your need of a sum--"

　　"My dear cousin--"

　　"Hush, hush! my cousin, not so loud; we must not wake others. See,"she said, opening her purse, "here are the savings of a poor girl whowants nothing. Charles, accept them! This morning I was ignorant ofthe value of money; you have taught it to me. It is but a means, afterall. A cousin is almost a brother; you can surely borrow the purse ofyour sister."

　　Eugenie, as much a woman as a young girl, never dreamed of refusal;but her cousin remained silent.

　　"Oh! you will not refuse?" cried Eugenie, the beatings of whose heartcould be heard in the deep silence.

　　Her cousin's hesitation mortified her; but the sore need of hisposition came clearer still to her mind, and she knelt down."I will never rise till you have taken that gold!" she said. "Mycousin, I implore you, answer me! let me know if you respect me, ifyou are generous, if--"

　　As he heard this cry of noble distress the young man's tears fell uponhis cousin's hands, which he had caught in his own to keep her fromkneeling. As the warm tears touched her, Eugenie sprang to the purseand poured its contents upon the table.

　　"Ah! yes, yes, you consent?" she said, weeping with joy. "Fearnothing, my cousin, you will be rich. This gold will bring youhappiness; some day you shall bring it back to me,--are we notpartners? I will obey all conditions. But you should not attach suchvalue to the gift."

　　Charles was at last able to express his feelings.

　　"Yes, Eugenie; my soul would be small indeed if I did not accept. Andyet,--gift for gift, confidence for confidence."

　　"What do you mean?" she said, frightened.

　　"Listen, dear cousin; I have here--" He interrupted himself to pointout a square box covered with an outer case of leather which was onthe drawers. "There," he continued, "is something as precious to me aslife itself. This box was a present from my mother. All day I havebeen thinking that if she could rise from her grave, she would herselfsell the gold which her love for me lavished on this dressing-case;but were I to do so, the act would seem to me a sacrilege." Eugeniepressed his hand as she heard these last words. "No," he added, aftera slight pause, during which a liquid glance of tenderness passedbetween them, "no, I will neither sell it nor risk its safety on myjourney. Dear Eugenie, you shall be its guardian. Never did friendcommit anything more sacred to another. Let me show it to you."He went to the box, took it from its outer coverings, opened it, andshowed his delighted cousin a dressing-case where the rich workmanshipgave to the gold ornaments a value far above their weight."What you admire there is nothing," he said, pushing a secret springwhich opened a hidden drawer. "Here is something which to me is worththe whole world." He drew out two portraits, masterpieces of MadameMirbel, richly set with pearls.

　　"Oh, how beautiful! Is it the lady to whom you wrote that--""No," he said, smiling; "this is my mother, and here is my father,your aunt and uncle. Eugenie, I beg you on my knees, keep my treasuresafely. If I die and your little fortune is lost, this gold and thesepearls will repay you. To you alone could I leave these portraits; youare worthy to keep them. But destroy them at last, so that they maypass into no other hands." Eugenie was silent. "Ah, yes, say yes! Youconsent?" he added with winning grace.

　　Hearing the very words she had just used to her cousin now addressedto herself, she turned upon him a look of love, her first look ofloving womanhood,--a glance in which there is nearly as much ofcoquetry as of inmost depth. He took her hand and kissed it."Angel of purity! between us two money is nothing, never can beanything. Feeling, sentiment, must be all henceforth."

　　"You are like your mother,--was her voice as soft as yours?""Oh! much softer--"

　　"Yes, for you," she said, dropping her eyelids. "Come, Charles, go tobed; I wish it; you must be tired. Good-night." She gently disengagedher hand from those of her cousin, who followed her to her room,lighting the way. When they were both upon the threshold,--"Ah!" he said, "why am I ruined?"

　　"What matter?--my father is rich; I think so," she answered."Poor child!" said Charles, making a step into her room and leaninghis back against the wall, "if that were so, he would never have letmy father die; he would not let you live in this poor way; he wouldlive otherwise himself."

　　"But he owns Froidfond."

　　"What is Froidfond worth?"

　　"I don't know; but he has Noyers."

　　"Nothing but a poor farm!"

　　"He has vineyards and fields."

　　"Mere nothing," said Charles disdainfully. "If your father had onlytwenty-four thousand francs a year do you suppose you would live inthis cold, barren room?" he added, making a step in advance. "Ah!there you will keep my treasures," he said, glancing at the oldcabinet, as if to hide his thoughts.

　　"Go and sleep," she said, hindering his entrance into the disorderedroom.

　　Charles stepped back, and they bid each other good-night with a mutualsmile.

　　Both fell asleep in the same dream; and from that moment the youthbegan to wear roses with his mourning. The next day, before breakfast,Madame Grandet found her daughter in the garden in company withCharles. The young man was still sad, as became a poor fellow who,plunged in misfortune, measures the depths of the abyss into which hehas fallen, and sees the terrible burden of his whole future life."My father will not be home till dinner-time," said Eugenie,perceiving the anxious look on her mother's face.

　　It was easy to trace in the face and manners of the young girl and inthe singular sweetness of her voice a unison of thought between herand her cousin. Their souls had espoused each other, perhaps beforethey even felt the force of the feelings which bound them together.Charles spent the morning in the hall, and his sadness was respected.Each of the three women had occupations of her own. Grandet had leftall his affairs unattended to, and a number of persons came onbusiness,--the plumber, the mason, the slater, the carpenter, thediggers, the dressers, the farmers; some to drive a bargain aboutrepairs, others to pay their rent or to be paid themselves forservices. Madame Grandet and Eugenie were obliged to go and come andlisten to the interminable talk of all these workmen and country folk.Nanon put away in her kitchen the produce which they brought astribute. She always waited for her master's orders before she knewwhat portion was to be used in the house and what was to be sold inthe market. It was the goodman's custom, like that of a great manycountry gentlemen, to drink his bad wine and eat his spoiled fruit.Towards five in the afternoon Grandet returned from Angers, havingmade fourteen thousand francs by the exchange on his gold, bringinghome in his wallet good treasury-notes which bore interest until theday he should invest them in the Funds. He had left Cornoiller atAngers to look after the horses, which were well-nigh foundered, withorders to bring them home slowly after they were rested.

　　"I have got back from Angers, wife," he said; "I am hungry."Nanon called out to him from the kitchen: "Haven't you eaten anythingsince yesterday?"

　　"Nothing," answered the old man.

　　Nanon brought in the soup. Des Grassins came to take his client'sorders just as the family sat down to dinner. Grandet had not evenobserved his nephew.

　　"Go on eating, Grandet," said the banker; "we can talk. Do you knowwhat gold is worth in Angers? They have come from Nantes after it? Ishall send some of ours."

　　"Don't send any," said Grandet; "they have got enough. We are such oldfriends, I ought to save you from such a loss of time."

　　"But gold is worth thirteen francs fifty centimes."

　　"Say /was/ worth--"

　　"Where the devil have they got any?"

　　"I went to Angers last night," answered Grandet in a low voice.The banker shook with surprise. Then a whispered conversation beganbetween the two, during which Grandet and des Grassins frequentlylooked at Charles. Presently des Grassins gave a start ofastonishment; probably Grandet was then instructing him to invest thesum which was to give him a hundred thousand francs a year in theFunds.

　　"Monsieur Grandet," said the banker to Charles, "I am starting forParis; if you have any commissions--"

　　"None, monsieur, I thank you," answered Charles.

　　"Thank him better than that, nephew. Monsieur is going to settle theaffairs of the house of Guillaume Grandet."

　　"Is there any hope?" said Charles eagerly.

　　"What!" exclaimed his uncle, with well-acted pride, "are you not mynephew? Your honor is ours. Is not your name Grandet?"

　　Charles rose, seized Pere Grandet, kissed him, turned pale, and leftthe room. Eugenie looked at her father with admiration.

　　"Well, good-by, des Grassins; it is all in your hands. Decoy thosepeople as best you can; lead 'em by the nose."

　　The two diplomatists shook hands. The old cooper accompanied thebanker to the front door. Then, after closing it, he came back andplunged into his armchair, saying to Nanon,--

　　"Get me some black-currant ratafia."

　　Too excited, however, to remain long in one place, he got up, lookedat the portrait of Monsieur de la Bertelliere, and began to sing,doing what Nanon called his dancing steps,--

　　"Dans les gardes francaises

　　J'avais un bon papa."

　　Nanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie looked at each other in silence.The hilarity of the master always frightened them when it reached itsclimax. The evening was soon over. Pere Grandet chose to go to bedearly, and when he went to bed, everybody else was expected to go too;like as when Augustus drank, Poland was drunk. On this occasion Nanon,Charles, and Eugenie were not less tired than the master. As forMadame Grandet, she slept, ate, drank, and walked according to thewill of her husband. However, during the two hours consecrated todigestion, the cooper, more facetious than he had ever been in hislife, uttered a number of his own particular apothegms,--a single oneof which will give the measure of his mind. When he had drunk hisratafia, he looked at his glass and said,--

　　"You have no sooner put your lips to a glass than it is empty! Such islife. You can't have and hold. Gold won't circulate and stay in yourpurse. If it were not for that, life would be too fine."

　　He was jovial and benevolent. When Nanon came with her spinning-wheel,"You must be tired," he said; "put away your hemp."

　　"Ah, bah! then I shall get sleepy," she answered.

　　"Poor Nanon! Will you have some ratafia?"

　　"I won't refuse a good offer; madame makes it a deal better than theapothecaries. What they sell is all drugs."

　　"They put too much sugar," said the master; "you can't taste anythingelse."

　　IX

　　The following day the family, meeting at eight o'clock for the earlybreakfast, made a picture of genuine domestic intimacy. Grief haddrawn Madame Grandet, Eugenie, and Charles /en rapport/; even Nanonsympathized, without knowing why. The four now made one family. As tothe old man, his satisfied avarice and the certainty of soon gettingrid of the dandy without having to pay more than his journey toNantes, made him nearly indifferent to his presence in the house. Heleft the two children, as he called Charles and Eugenie, free toconduct themselves as they pleased, under the eye of Madame Grandet,in whom he had implicit confidence as to all that concerned public andreligious morality. He busied himself in straightening the boundariesof his fields and ditches along the high-road, in his poplar-plantations beside the Loire, in the winter work of his vineyards, andat Froidfond. All these things occupied his whole time.

　　For Eugenie the springtime of love had come. Since the scene at nightwhen she gave her little treasure to her cousin, her heart hadfollowed the treasure. Confederates in the same secret, they looked ateach other with a mutual intelligence which sank to the depth of theirconsciousness, giving a closer communion, a more intimate relation totheir feelings, and putting them, so to speak, beyond the pale ofordinary life. Did not their near relationship warrant the gentlenessin their tones, the tenderness in their glances? Eugenie took delightin lulling her cousin's pain with the pretty childish joys of a new-born love. Are there no sweet similitudes between the birth of loveand the birth of life? Do we not rock the babe with gentle songs andsoftest glances? Do we not tell it marvellous tales of the goldenfuture? Hope herself, does she not spread her radiant wings above itshead? Does it not shed, with infant fickleness, its tears of sorrowand its tears of joy? Does it not fret for trifles, cry for the prettypebbles with which to build its shifting palaces, for the flowersforgotten as soon as plucked? Is it not eager to grasp the comingtime, to spring forward into life? Love is our second transformation.Childhood and love were one and the same thing to Eugenie and toCharles; it was a first passion, with all its child-like play,--themore caressing to their hearts because they now were wrapped insadness. Struggling at birth against the gloom of mourning, their lovewas only the more in harmony with the provincial plainness of thatgray and ruined house. As they exchanged a few words beside the wellin the silent court, or lingered in the garden for the sunset hour,sitting on a mossy seat saying to each other the infinite nothings oflove, or mused in the silent calm which reigned between the house andthe ramparts like that beneath the arches of a church, Charlescomprehended the sanctity of love; for his great lady, his dearAnnette, had taught him only its stormy troubles. At this moment heleft the worldly passion, coquettish, vain, and showy as it was, andturned to the true, pure love. He loved even the house, whose customsno longer seemed to him ridiculous. He got up early in the morningsthat he might talk with Eugenie for a moment before her father came todole out the provisions; when the steps of the old man sounded on thestaircase he escaped into the garden. The small criminality of thismorning /tete-a-tete/ which Nanon pretended not to see, gave to theirinnocent love the lively charm of a forbidden joy.

　　After breakfast, when Grandet had gone to his fields and his otheroccupations, Charles remained with the mother and daughter, finding anunknown pleasure in holding their skeins, in watching them at work, inlistening to their quiet prattle. The simplicity of this half-monasticlife, which revealed to him the beauty of these souls, unknown andunknowing of the world, touched him keenly. He had believed suchmorals impossible in France, and admitted their existence nowhere butin Germany; even so, they seemed to him fabulous, only real in thenovels of Auguste Lafontaine. Soon Eugenie became to him the Margaretof Goethe--before her fall. Day by day his words, his looks enrapturedthe poor girl, who yielded herself up with delicious non-resistance tothe current of love; she caught her happiness as a swimmer seizes theoverhanging branch of a willow to draw himself from the river and lieat rest upon its shore. Did no dread of a coming absence sadden thehappy hours of those fleeting days? Daily some little circumstancereminded them of the parting that was at hand.

　　Three days after the departure of des Grassins, Grandet took hisnephew to the Civil courts, with the solemnity which country peopleattach to all legal acts, that he might sign a deed surrendering hisrights in his father's estate. Terrible renunciation! species ofdomestic apostasy! Charles also went before Maitre Cruchot to make twopowers of attorney,--one for des Grassins, the other for the friendwhom he had charged with the sale of his belongings. After that heattended to all the formalities necessary to obtain a passport forforeign countries; and finally, when he received his simple mourningclothes from Paris, he sent for the tailor of Saumur and sold to himhis useless wardrobe. This last act pleased Grandet exceedingly."Ah! now you look like a man prepared to embark and make yourfortune," he said, when Charles appeared in a surtout of plain blackcloth. "Good! very good!"

　　"I hope you will believe, monsieur," answered his nephew, "that Ishall always try to conform to my situation."

　　"What's that?" said his uncle, his eyes lighting up at a handful ofgold which Charles was carrying.

　　"Monsieur, I have collected all my buttons and rings and othersuperfluities which may have some value; but not knowing any one inSaumur, I wanted to ask you to--"

　　"To buy them?" said Grandet, interrupting him.

　　"No, uncle; only to tell me of an honest man who--"

　　"Give me those things, I will go upstairs and estimate their value; Iwill come back and tell you what it is to a fraction. Jeweller'sgold," examining a long chain, "eighteen or nineteen carats."The goodman held out his huge hand and received the mass of gold,which he carried away.

　　"Cousin," said Grandet, "may I offer you these two buttons? They canfasten ribbons round your wrists; that sort of bracelet is much thefashion just now."

　　"I accept without hesitation," she answered, giving him anunderstanding look.

　　"Aunt, here is my mother's thimble; I have always kept it carefully inmy dressing-case," said Charles, presenting a pretty gold thimble toMadame Grandet, who for many years had longed for one.

　　"I cannot thank you; no words are possible, my nephew," said the poormother, whose eyes filled with tears. "Night and morning in my prayersI shall add one for you, the most earnest of all--for those whotravel. If I die, Eugenie will keep this treasure for you.""They are worth nine hundred and eighty-nine francs, seventy-fivecentimes," said Grandet, opening the door. "To save you the pain ofselling them, I will advance the money--in /livres/."

　　The word /livres/ on the littoral of the Loire signifies that crownprices of six /livres/ are to be accepted as six francs withoutdeduction.

　　"I dared not propose it to you," answered Charles; "but it was mostrepugnant to me to sell my jewels to some second-hand dealer in yourown town. People should wash their dirty linen at home, as Napoleonsaid. I thank you for your kindness."

　　Grandet scratched his ear, and there was a moment's silence."My dear uncle," resumed Charles, looking at him with an uneasy air,as if he feared to wound his feelings, "my aunt and cousin have beenkind enough to accept a trifling remembrance of me. Will you allow meto give you these sleeve-buttons, which are useless to me now? Theywill remind you of a poor fellow who, far away, will always think ofthose who are henceforth all his family."

　　"My lad, my lad, you mustn't rob yourself this way! Let me see, wife,what have you got?" he added, turning eagerly to her. "Ah! a goldthimble. And you, little girl? What! diamond buttons? Yes, I'll acceptyour present, nephew," he answered, shaking Charles by the hand. "But--you must let me--pay--your--yes, your passage to the Indies. Yes, Iwish to pay your passage because--d'ye see, my boy?--in valuing yourjewels I estimated only the weight of the gold; very likely theworkmanship is worth something. So let us settle it that I am to giveyou fifteen hundred francs--in /livres/; Cruchot will lend them to me.I haven't got a copper farthing here,--unless Perrotet, who isbehindhand with his rent, should pay up. By the bye, I'll go and seehim."

　　He took his hat, put on his gloves, and went out.

　　"Then you are really going?" said Eugenie to her cousin, with a sadlook, mingled with admiration.

　　"I must," he said, bowing his head.

　　For some days past, Charles's whole bearing, manners, and speech hadbecome those of a man who, in spite of his profound affliction, feelsthe weight of immense obligations and has the strength to gathercourage from misfortune. He no longer repined, he became a man.Eugenie never augured better of her cousin's character than when shesaw him come down in the plain black clothes which suited well withhis pale face and sombre countenance. On that day the two women put ontheir own mourning, and all three assisted at a Requiem celebrated inthe parish church for the soul of the late Guillaume Grandet.At the second breakfast Charles received letters from Paris and beganto read them.

　　"Well, cousin, are you satisfied with the management of your affairs?"said Eugenie in a low voice.

　　"Never ask such questions, my daughter," said Grandet. "What thedevil! do I tell you my affairs? Why do you poke your nose into yourcousin's? Let the lad alone!"

　　"Oh! I haven't any secrets," said Charles.

　　"Ta, ta, ta, ta, nephew; you'll soon find out that you must hold yourtongue in business."

　　When the two lovers were alone in the garden, Charles said to Eugenie,drawing her down on the old bench beneath the walnut-tree,--"I did right to trust Alphonse; he has done famously. He has managedmy affairs with prudence and good faith. I now owe nothing in Paris.All my things have been sold; and he tells me that he has taken theadvice of an old sea-captain and spent three thousand francs on acommercial outfit of European curiosities which will be sure to be indemand in the Indies. He has sent my trunks to Nantes, where a ship isloading for San Domingo. In five days, Eugenie, we must bid each otherfarewell--perhaps forever, at least for years. My outfit and tenthousand francs, which two of my friends send me, are a very smallbeginning. I cannot look to return for many years. My dear cousin, donot weight your life in the scales with mine; I may perish; some goodmarriage may be offered to you--"

　　"Do you love me?" she said.

　　"Oh, yes! indeed, yes!" he answered, with a depth of tone thatrevealed an equal depth of feeling.

　　"I shall wait, Charles--Good heavens! there is my father at hiswindow," she said, repulsing her cousin, who leaned forward to kissher.

　　She ran quickly under the archway. Charles followed her. When she sawhim, she retreated to the foot of the staircase and opened the swing-door; then, scarcely knowing where she was going, Eugenie reached thecorner near Nanon's den, in the darkest end of the passage. ThereCharles caught her hand and drew her to his heart. Passing his armabout her waist, he made her lean gently upon him. Eugenie no longerresisted; she received and gave the purest, the sweetest, and yet,withal, the most unreserved of kisses.

　　"Dear Eugenie, a cousin is better than a brother, for he can marryyou," said Charles.

　　"So be it!" cried Nanon, opening the door of her lair.

　　The two lovers, alarmed, fled into the hall, where Eugenie took up herwork and Charles began to read the litanies of the Virgin in MadameGrandet's prayer-book.

　　"Mercy!" cried Nanon, "now they're saying their prayers."As soon as Charles announced his immediate departure, Grandetbestirred himself to testify much interest in his nephew. He becamevery liberal of all that cost him nothing; took pains to find apacker; declared the man asked too much for his cases; insisted onmaking them himself out of old planks; got up early in the morning tofit and plane and nail together the strips, out of which he made, tohis own satisfaction, some strong cases, in which he packed allCharles's effects; he also took upon himself to send them by boat downthe Loire, to insure them, and get them to Nantes in proper time.After the kiss taken in the passage, the hours fled for Eugenie withfrightful rapidity. Sometimes she thought of following her cousin.Those who have known that most endearing of all passions,--the onewhose duration is each day shortened by time, by age, by mortalillness, by human chances and fatalities,--they will understand thepoor girl's tortures. She wept as she walked in the garden, now sonarrow to her, as indeed the court, the house, the town all seemed.She launched in thought upon the wide expanse of the ocean he wasabout to traverse. At last the eve of his departure came. Thatmorning, in the absence of Grandet and of Nanon, the precious casewhich contained the two portraits was solemnly installed in the onlydrawer of the old cabinet which could be locked, where the now emptyvelvet purse was lying. This deposit was not made without a goodlynumber of tears and kisses. When Eugenie placed the key within herbosom she had no courage to forbid the kiss with which Charles sealedthe act.

　　"It shall never leave that place, my friend," she said.

　　"Then my heart will be always there."

　　"Ah! Charles, it is not right," she said, as though she blamed him."Are we not married?" he said. "I have thy promise,--then take mine.""Thine; I am thine forever!" they each said, repeating the words twiceover.

　　No promise made upon this earth was ever purer. The innocent sincerityof Eugenie had sanctified for a moment the young man's love.On the morrow the breakfast was sad. Nanon herself, in spite of thegold-embroidered robe and the Jeannette cross bestowed by Charles, hadtears in her eyes.

　　"The poor dear monsieur who is going on the seas--oh, may God guidehim!"

　　At half-past ten the whole family started to escort Charles to thediligence for Nantes. Nanon let loose the dog, locked the door, andinsisted on carrying the young man's carpet-bag. All the tradesmen inthe tortuous old street were on the sill of their shop-doors to watchthe procession, which was joined in the market-place by MaitreCruchot.

　　"Eugenie, be sure you don't cry," said her mother.

　　"Nephew," said Grandet, in the doorway of the inn from which the coachstarted, kissing Charles on both cheeks, "depart poor, return rich;you will find the honor of your father safe. I answer for that myself,I--Grandet; for it will only depend on you to--"

　　"Ah! my uncle, you soften the bitterness of my departure. Is it notthe best gift that you could make me?"

　　Not understanding his uncle's words which he had thus interrupted,Charles shed tears of gratitude upon the tanned cheeks of the oldmiser, while Eugenie pressed the hand of her cousin and that of herfather with all her strength. The notary smiled, admiring the slyspeech of the old man, which he alone had understood. The family stoodabout the coach until it started; then as it disappeared upon thebridge, and its rumble grew fainter in the distance, Grandet said:"Good-by to you!"

　　Happily no one but Maitre Cruchot heard the exclamation. Eugenie andher mother had gone to a corner of the quay from which they couldstill see the diligence and wave their white handkerchiefs, to whichCharles made answer by displaying his.

　　"Ah! mother, would that I had the power of God for a single moment,"said Eugenie, when she could no longer see her lover's handkerchief.*****

　　Not to interrupt the current of events which are about to take placein the bosom of the Grandet family, it is necessary to cast aforestalling eye upon the various operations which the goodman carriedon in Paris by means of Monsieur des Grassins. A month after thelatter's departure from Saumur, Grandet, became possessed of acertificate of a hundred thousand francs a year from his investment inthe Funds, bought at eighty francs net. The particulars revealed athis death by the inventory of his property threw no light upon themeans which his suspicious nature took to remit the price of theinvestment and receive the certificate thereof. Maitre Cruchot was ofopinion that Nanon, unknown to herself, was the trusty instrument bywhich the money was transported; for about this time she was absentfive days, under a pretext of putting things to rights at Froidfond,--as if the goodman were capable of leaving anything lying about or outof order!

　　In all that concerned the business of the house of Guillaume Grandetthe old cooper's intentions were fulfilled to the letter. The Bank ofFrance, as everybody knows, affords exact information about all thelarge fortunes in Paris and the provinces. The names of des Grassinsand Felix Grandet of Saumur were well known there, and they enjoyedthe esteem bestowed on financial celebrities whose wealth comes fromimmense and unencumbered territorial possessions. The arrival of theSaumur banker for the purpose, it was said, of honorably liquidatingthe affairs of Grandet of Paris, was enough to avert the shame ofprotested notes from the memory of the defunct merchant. The seals onthe property were taken off in presence of the creditors, and thenotary employed by Grandet went to work at once on the inventory ofthe assets. Soon after this, des Grassins called a meeting of thecreditors, who unanimously elected him, conjointly with FrancoisKeller, the head of a rich banking-house and one of those principallyinterested in the affair, as liquidators, with full power to protectboth the honor of the family and the interests of the claimants. Thecredit of Grandet of Saumur, the hopes he diffused by means of desGrassins in the minds of all concerned, facilitated the transactions.Not a single creditor proved recalcitrant; no one thought of passinghis claim to his profit-and-loss account; each and all saidconfidently, "Grandet of Saumur will pay."

　　Six months went by. The Parisians had redeemed the notes incirculation as they fell due, and held them under lock and key intheir desks. First result aimed at by the old cooper! Nine monthsafter this preliminary meeting, the two liquidators distributed forty-seven per cent to each creditor on his claim. This amount was obtainedby the sale of the securities, property, and possessions of all kindsbelonging to the late Guillaume Grandet, and was paid over withscrupulous fidelity. Unimpeachable integrity was shown in thetransaction. The creditors gratefully acknowledged the remarkable andincontestable honor displayed by the Grandets. When these praises hadcirculated for a certain length of time, the creditors asked for therest of their money. It became necessary to write a collective letterto Grandet of Saumur.

　　"Here it comes!" said the old man as he threw the letter into thefire. "Patience, my good friends!"

　　In answer to the proposals contained in the letter, Grandet of Saumurdemanded that all vouchers for claims against the estate of hisbrother should be deposited with a notary, together with aquittancesfor the forty-seven per cent already paid; he made this demand underpretence of sifting the accounts and finding out the exact conditionof the estate. It roused at once a variety of difficulties. Generallyspeaking, the creditor is a species of maniac, ready to agree toanything one day, on the next breathing fire and slaughter; later on,he grows amicable and easy-going. To-day his wife is good-humored, hislast baby has cut its first tooth, all is well at home, and he isdetermined not to lose a sou; on the morrow it rains, he can't go out,he is gloomy, he says yes to any proposal that is made to him, so longas it will put an end to the affair; on the third day he declares hemust have guarantees; by the end of the month he wants his debtor'shead, and becomes at heart an executioner. The creditor is a good deallike the sparrow on whose tail confiding children are invited to putsalt,--with this difference, that he applies the image to his claim,the proceeds of which he is never able to lay hold of. Grandet hadstudied the atmospheric variations of creditors, and the creditors ofhis brother justified all his calculations. Some were angry, andflatly refused to give in their vouchers.

　　"Very good; so much the better," said Grandet, rubbing his hands overthe letter in which des Grassins announced the fact.

　　Others agreed to the demand, but only on condition that their rightsshould be fully guaranteed; they renounced none, and even reserved thepower of ultimately compelling a failure. On this began a longcorrespondence, which ended in Grandet of Saumur agreeing to allconditions. By means of this concession the placable creditors wereable to bring the dissatisfied creditors to reason. The deposit wasthen made, but not without sundry complaints.

　　"Your goodman," they said to des Grassins, "is tricking us."Twenty-three months after the death of Guillaume Grandet many of thecreditors, carried away by more pressing business in the markets ofParis, had forgotten their Grandet claims, or only thought of them tosay:

　　"I begin to believe that forty-seven per cent is all I shall ever getout of that affair."

　　The old cooper had calculated on the power of time, which, as he usedto say, is a pretty good devil after all. By the end of the third yeardes Grassins wrote to Grandet that he had brought the creditors toagree to give up their claims for ten per cent on the two million fourhundred thousand francs still due by the house of Grandet. Grandetanswered that the notary and the broker whose shameful failures hadcaused the death of his brother were still living, that they might nowhave recovered their credit, and that they ought to be sued, so as toget something out of them towards lessening the total of the deficit.By the end of the fourth year the liabilities were definitelyestimated at a sum of twelve hundred thousand francs. Manynegotiations, lasting over six months, took place between thecreditors and the liquidators, and between the liquidators andGrandet. To make a long story short, Grandet of Saumur, anxious bythis time to get out of the affair, told the liquidators, about theninth month of the fourth year, that his nephew had made a fortune inthe Indies and was disposed to pay his father's debts in full; hetherefore could not take upon himself to make any settlement withoutpreviously consulting him; he had written to him, and was expecting ananswer. The creditors were held in check until the middle of the fifthyear by the words, "payment in full," which the wily old miser threwout from time to time as he laughed in his beard, saying with a smileand an oath, "Those Parisians!"

　　But the creditors were reserved for a fate unexampled in the annals ofcommerce. When the events of this history bring them once more intonotice, they will be found still in the position Grandet had resolvedto force them into from the first.

　　As soon as the Funds reached a hundred and fifteen, Pere Grandet soldout his interests and withdrew two million four hundred thousandfrancs in gold, to which he added, in his coffers, the six hundredthousand francs compound interest which he had derived from thecapital. Des Grassins now lived in Paris. In the first place he hadbeen made a deputy; then he became infatuated (father of a family ashe was, though horribly bored by the provincial life of Saumur) with apretty actress at the Theatre de Madame, known as Florine, and hepresently relapsed into the old habits of his army life. It is uselessto speak of his conduct; Saumur considered it profoundly immoral. Hiswife was fortunate in the fact of her property being settled uponherself, and in having sufficient ability to keep up the banking-housein Saumur, which was managed in her name and repaired the breach inher fortune caused by the extravagance of her husband. The Cruchotinesmade so much talk about the false position of the quasi-widow that shemarried her daughter very badly, and was forced to give up all hope ofan alliance between Eugenie Grandet and her son. Adolphe joined hisfather in Paris and became, it was said, a worthless fellow. TheCruchots triumphed.

　　"Your husband hasn't common sense," said Grandet as he lent Madame desGrassins some money on a note securely endorsed. "I am very sorry foryou, for you are a good little woman."

　　"Ah, monsieur," said the poor lady, "who could have believed that whenhe left Saumur to go to Paris on your business he was going to hisruin?"

　　"Heaven is my witness, madame, that up to the last moment I did all Icould to prevent him from going. Monsieur le president was mostanxious to take his place; but he was determined to go, and now we allsee why."

　　In this way Grandet made it quite plain that he was under noobligation to des Grassins.

　　*****

　　In all situations women have more cause for suffering than men, andthey suffer more. Man has strength and the power of exercising it; heacts, moves, thinks, occupies himself; he looks ahead, and seesconsolation in the future. It was thus with Charles. But the womanstays at home; she is always face to face with the grief from whichnothing distracts her; she goes down to the depths of the abyss whichyawns before her, measures it, and often fills it with her tears andprayers. Thus did Eugenie. She initiated herself into her destiny. Tofeel, to love, to suffer, to devote herself,--is not this the sum ofwoman's life? Eugenie was to be in all things a woman, except in theone thing that consoles for all. Her happiness, picked up like nailsscattered on a wall--to use the fine simile of Bossuet--would never somuch as fill even the hollow of her hand. Sorrows are never long incoming; for her they came soon. The day after Charles's departure thehouse of Monsieur Grandet resumed its ordinary aspect in the eyes ofall, except in those of Eugenie, to whom it grew suddenly empty. Shewished, if it could be done unknown to her father, that Charles's roommight be kept as he had left it. Madame Grandet and Nanon were willingaccomplices in this /statu quo/.

　　"Who knows but he may come back sooner than we think for?" she said."Ah, don't I wish I could see him back!" answered Nanon. "I took tohim! He was such a dear, sweet young man,--pretty too, with his curlyhair." Eugenie looked at Nanon. "Holy Virgin! don't look at me thatway, mademoiselle; your eyes are like those of a lost soul."From that day the beauty of Mademoiselle Grandet took a new character.The solemn thoughts of love which slowly filled her soul, and thedignity of the woman beloved, gave to her features an illuminationsuch as painters render by a halo. Before the coming of her cousin,Eugenie might be compared to the Virgin before the conception; afterhe had gone, she was like the Virgin Mother,--she had given birth tolove. These two Marys so different, so well represented by Spanishart, embody one of those shining symbols with which Christianityabounds.

　　Returning from Mass on the morning after Charles's departure,--havingmade a vow to hear it daily,--Eugenie bought a map of the world, whichshe nailed up beside her looking-glass, that she might follow hercousin on his westward way, that she might put herself, were it everso little, day by day into the ship that bore him, and see him and askhim a thousand questions,--"Art thou well? Dost thou suffer? Dost thouthink of me when the star, whose beauty and usefulness thou hasttaught me to know, shines upon thee?" In the mornings she sat pensivebeneath the walnut-tree, on the worm-eaten bench covered with graylichens, where they had said to each other so many precious things, somany trifles, where they had built the pretty castles of their futurehome. She thought of the future now as she looked upward to the bit ofsky which was all the high walls suffered her to see; then she turnedher eyes to the angle where the sun crept on, and to the roof abovethe room in which he had slept. Hers was the solitary love, thepersistent love, which glides into every thought and becomes thesubstance, or, as our fathers might have said, the tissue of life.When the would-be friends of Pere Grandet came in the evening fortheir game at cards, she was gay and dissimulating; but all themorning she talked of Charles with her mother and Nanon. Nanon hadbrought herself to see that she could pity the sufferings of her youngmistress without failing in her duty to the old master, and she wouldsay to Eugenie,--

　　"If I had a man for myself I'd--I'd follow him to hell, yes, I'dexterminate myself for him; but I've none. I shall die and never knowwhat life is. Would you believe, mamz'elle, that old Cornoiller (agood fellow all the same) is always round my petticoats for the sakeof my money,--just for all the world like the rats who come smellingafter the master's cheese and paying court to you? I see it all; I'vegot a shrewd eye, though I am as big as a steeple. Well, mamz'elle, itpleases me, but it isn't love."

　　X

　　Two months went by. This domestic life, once so monotonous, was nowquickened with the intense interest of a secret that bound these womenintimately together. For them Charles lived and moved beneath the grimgray rafters of the hall. Night and morning Eugenie opened thedressing-case and gazed at the portrait of her aunt. One Sundaymorning her mother surprised her as she stood absorbed in finding hercousin's features in his mother's face. Madame Grandet was then forthe first time admitted into the terrible secret of the exchange madeby Charles against her daughter's treasure.

　　"You gave him all!" cried the poor mother, terrified. "What will yousay to your father on New Year's Day when he asks to see your gold?"Eugenie's eyes grew fixed, and the two women lived through mortalterror for more than half the morning. They were so troubled in mindthat they missed high Mass, and only went to the military service. Inthree days the year 1819 would come to an end. In three days aterrible drama would begin, a bourgeois tragedy, without poison, ordagger, or the spilling of blood; but--as regards the actors in it--more cruel than all the fabled horrors in the family of the Atrides."What will become of us?" said Madame Grandet to her daughter, lettingher knitting fall upon her knees.

　　The poor mother had gone through such anxiety for the past two monthsthat the woollen sleeves which she needed for the coming winter werenot yet finished. This domestic fact, insignificant as it seems, boresad results. For want of those sleeves, a chill seized her in themidst of a sweat caused by a terrible explosion of anger on the partof her husband.

　　"I have been thinking, my poor child, that if you had confided yoursecret to me we should have had time to write to Monsieur des Grassinsin Paris. He might have sent us gold pieces like yours; though Grandetknows them all, perhaps--"

　　"Where could we have got the money?"

　　"I would have pledged my own property. Besides, Monsieur des Grassinswould have--"

　　"It is too late," said Eugenie in a broken, hollow voice. "To-morrowmorning we must go and wish him a happy New Year in his chamber.""But, my daughter, why should I not consult the Cruchots?""No, no; it would be delivering me up to them, and putting ourselvesin their power. Besides, I have chosen my course. I have done right, Irepent of nothing. God will protect me. His will be done! Ah! mother,if you had read his letter, you, too, would have thought only of him."The next morning, January 1, 1820, the horrible fear to which motherand daughter were a prey suggested to their minds a natural excuse bywhich to escape the solemn entrance into Grandet's chamber. The winterof 1819-1820 was one of the coldest of that epoch. The snow encumberedthe roofs.

　　Madame Grandet called to her husband as soon as she heard him stirringin his chamber, and said,--

　　"Grandet, will you let Nanon light a fire here for me? The cold is sosharp that I am freezing under the bedclothes. At my age I need somecomforts. Besides," she added, after a slight pause, "Eugenie shallcome and dress here; the poor child might get an illness from dressingin her cold room in such weather. Then we will go and wish you a happyNew Year beside the fire in the hall."

　　"Ta, ta, ta, ta, what a tongue! a pretty way to begin the new year,Madame Grandet! You never talked so much before; but you haven't beensopping your bread in wine, I know that."

　　There was a moment's silence.

　　"Well," resumed the goodman, who no doubt had some reason of his ownfor agreeing to his wife's request, "I'll do what you ask, MadameGrandet. You are a good woman, and I don't want any harm to happen toyou at your time of life,--though as a general thing the Bertellieresare as sound as a roach. Hein! isn't that so?" he added after a pause."Well, I forgive them; we got their property in the end." And hecoughed.

　　"You are very gay this morning, monsieur," said the poor womangravely.

　　"I'm always gay,--

　　"'Gai, gai, gai, le tonnelier,

　　Raccommodez votre cuvier!'"

　　he answered, entering his wife's room fully dressed. "Yes, on my word,it is cold enough to freeze you solid. We shall have a fine breakfast,wife. Des Grassins has sent me a pate-de-foie-gras truffled! I amgoing now to get it at the coach-office. There'll be a double napoleonfor Eugenie in the package," he whispered in Madame Grandet's ear. "Ihave no gold left, wife. I had a few stray pieces--I don't mindtelling you that--but I had to let them go in business."

　　Then, by way of celebrating the new year, he kissed her on theforehead.

　　"Eugenie," cried the mother, when Grandet was fairly gone, "I don'tknow which side of the bed your father got out of, but he is good-tempered this morning. Perhaps we shall come out safe after all?""What's happened to the master?" said Nanon, entering her mistress'sroom to light the fire. "First place, he said, 'Good-morning; happyNew Year, you big fool! Go and light my wife's fire, she's cold'; andthen, didn't I feel silly when he held out his hand and gave me a six-franc piece, which isn't worn one bit? Just look at it, madame! Oh,the kind man! He is a good man, that's a fact. There are some peoplewho the older they get the harder they grow; but he,--why he's gettingsoft and improving with time, like your ratafia! He is a good, goodman--"

　　The secret of Grandet's joy lay in the complete success of hisspeculation. Monsieur des Grassins, after deducting the amount whichthe old cooper owed him for the discount on a hundred and fiftythousand francs in Dutch notes, and for the surplus which he hadadvanced to make up the sum required for the investment in the Fundswhich was to produce a hundred thousand francs a year, had now senthim, by the diligence, thirty thousand francs in silver coin, theremainder of his first half-year's interest, informing him at the sametime that the Funds had already gone up in value. They were thenquoted at eighty-nine; the shrewdest capitalists bought in, towardsthe last of January, at ninety-three. Grandet had thus gained in twomonths twelve per cent on his capital; he had simplified his accounts,and would in future receive fifty thousand francs interest every sixmonths, without incurring any taxes or costs for repairs. Heunderstood at last what it was to invest money in the publicsecurities,--a system for which provincials have always shown a markedrepugnance,--and at the end of five years he found himself master of acapital of six millions, which increased without much effort of hisown, and which, joined to the value and proceeds of his territorialpossessions, gave him a fortune that was absolutely colossal. The sixfrancs bestowed on Nanon were perhaps the reward of some great servicewhich the poor servant had rendered to her master unawares."Oh! oh! where's Pere Grandet going? He has been scurrying about sincesunrise as if to a fire," said the tradespeople to each other as theyopened their shops for the day.

　　When they saw him coming back from the wharf, followed by a porterfrom the coach-office wheeling a barrow which was laden with sacks,they all had their comments to make:--

　　"Water flows to the river; the old fellow was running after his gold,"said one.

　　"He gets it from Paris and Froidfond and Holland," said another."He'll end by buying up Saumur," cried a third.

　　"He doesn't mind the cold, he's so wrapped up in his gains," said awife to her husband.

　　"Hey! hey! Monsieur Grandet, if that's too heavy for you," said acloth-dealer, his nearest neighbor, "I'll take it off your hands.""Heavy?" said the cooper, "I should think so; it's all sous!""Silver sous," said the porter in a low voice.

　　"If you want me to take care of you, keep your tongue between yourteeth," said the goodman to the porter as they reached the door."The old fox! I thought he was deaf; seems he can hear fast enough infrosty weather."

　　"Here's twenty sous for your New Year, and /mum/!" said Grandet. "Beoff with you! Nanon shall take back your barrow. Nanon, are thelinnets at church?"

　　"Yes, monsieur."

　　"Then lend a hand! go to work!" he cried, piling the sacks upon her.In a few moments all were carried up to his inner room, where he shuthimself in with them. "When breakfast is ready, knock on the wall," hesaid as he disappeared. "Take the barrow back to the coach-office."The family did not breakfast that day until ten o'clock.

　　"Your father will not ask to see your gold downstairs," said MadameGrandet as they got back from Mass. "You must pretend to be verychilly. We may have time to replace the treasure before your fete-day."

　　Grandet came down the staircase thinking of his splendid speculationin government securities, and wondering how he could metamorphose hisParisian silver into solid gold; he was making up his mind to investin this way everything he could lay hands on until the Funds shouldreach a par value. Fatal reverie for Eugenie! As soon as he came in,the two women wished him a happy New Year,--his daughter by puttingher arms round his neck and caressing him; Madame Grandet gravely andwith dignity.

　　"Ha! ha! my child," he said, kissing his daughter on both cheeks. "Iwork for you, don't you see? I think of your happiness. Must havemoney to be happy. Without money there's not a particle of happiness.Here! there's a new napoleon for you. I sent to Paris for it. On myword of honor, it's all the gold I have; you are the only one that hasgot any gold. I want to see your gold, little one."

　　"Oh! it is too cold; let us have breakfast," answered Eugenie."Well, after breakfast, then; it will help the digestion. That fatdes Grassins sent me the pate. Eat as much as you like, my children,it costs nothing. Des Grassins is getting along very well. I amsatisfied with him. The old fish is doing Charles a good service, andgratis too. He is making a very good settlement of that poor deceasedGrandet's business. Hoo! hoo!" he muttered, with his mouth full, aftera pause, "how good it is! Eat some, wife; that will feed you for atleast two days."

　　"I am not hungry. I am very poorly; you know that."

　　"Ah, bah! you can stuff yourself as full as you please without danger,you're a Bertelliere; they are all hearty. You are a bit yellow,that's true; but I like yellow, myself."

　　The expectation of ignominious and public death is perhaps lesshorrible to a condemned criminal than the anticipation of what wascoming after breakfast to Madame Grandet and Eugenie. The moregleefully the old man talked and ate, the more their hearts shrankwithin them. The daughter, however, had an inward prop at this crisis,--she gathered strength through love.

　　"For him! for him!" she cried within her, "I would die a thousanddeaths."

　　At this thought, she shot a glance at her mother which flamed withcourage.

　　"Clear away," said Grandet to Nanon when, about eleven o'clock,breakfast was over, "but leave the table. We can spread your littletreasure upon it," he said, looking at Eugenie. "Little? Faith! no; itisn't little. You possess, in actual value, five thousand nine hundredand fifty-nine francs and the forty I gave you just now. That makessix thousand francs, less one. Well, now see here, little one! I'llgive you that one franc to make up the round number. Hey! what are youlistening for, Nanon? Mind your own business; go and do your work."Nanon disappeared.

　　"Now listen, Eugenie; you must give me back your gold. You won'trefuse your father, my little girl, hein?"

　　The two women were dumb.

　　"I have no gold myself. I had some, but it is all gone. I'll give youin return six thousand francs in /livres/, and you are to put themjust where I tell you. You mustn't think anything more about your'dozen.' When I marry you (which will be soon) I shall get you ahusband who can give you the finest 'dozen' ever seen in theprovinces. Now attend to me, little girl. There's a fine chance foryou; you can put your six thousand francs into government funds, andyou will receive every six months nearly two hundred francs interest,without taxes, or repairs, or frost, or hail, or floods, or anythingelse to swallow up the money. Perhaps you don't like to part with yourgold, hey, my girl? Never mind, bring it to me all the same. I'll getyou some more like it,--like those Dutch coins and the /portugaises/,the rupees of Mogul, and the /genovines/,--I'll give you some more onyour fete-days, and in three years you'll have got back half yourlittle treasure. What's that you say? Look up, now. Come, go and getit, the precious metal. You ought to kiss me on the eyelids fortelling you the secrets and the mysteries of the life and death ofmoney. Yes, silver and gold live and swarm like men; they come, andgo, and sweat, and multiply--"

　　Eugenie rose; but after making a few steps towards the door she turnedabruptly, looked her father in the face, and said,--

　　"I have not got /my/ gold."

　　"You have not got your gold!" cried Grandet, starting up erect, like ahorse that hears a cannon fired beside him.

　　"No, I have not got it."

　　"You are mistaken, Eugenie."

　　"No."

　　"By the shears of my father!"

　　Whenever the old man swore that oath the rafters trembled."Holy Virgin! Madame is turning pale," cried Nanon.

　　"Grandet, your anger will kill me," said the poor mother."Ta, ta, ta, ta! nonsense; you never die in your family! Eugenie, whathave you done with your gold?" he cried, rushing upon her."Monsieur," said the daughter, falling at Madame Grandet's knees, "mymother is ill. Look at her; do not kill her."

　　Grandet was frightened by the pallor which overspread his wife's face,usually so yellow.

　　"Nanon, help me to bed," said the poor woman in a feeble voice; "I amdying--"

　　Nanon gave her mistress an arm, Eugenie gave her another; but it wasonly with infinite difficulty that they could get her upstairs, shefell with exhaustion at every step. Grandet remained alone. However,in a few moments he went up six or eight stairs and called out,--"Eugenie, when your mother is in bed, come down."

　　"Yes, father."

　　She soon came, after reassuring her mother.

　　"My daughter," said Grandet, "you will now tell me what you have donewith your gold."

　　"My father, if you make me presents of which I am not the solemistress, take them back," she answered coldly, picking up thenapoleon from the chimney-piece and offering it to him.

　　Grandet seized the coin and slipped it into his breeches' pocket."I shall certainly never give you anything again. Not so much asthat!" he said, clicking his thumb-nail against a front tooth. "Do youdare to despise your father? have you no confidence in him? Don't youknow what a father is? If he is nothing for you, he is nothing at all.Where is your gold?"

　　"Father, I love and respect you, in spite of your anger; but I humblyask you to remember that I am twenty-three years old. You have told meoften that I have attained my majority, and I do not forget it. I haveused my money as I chose to use it, and you may be sure that it wasput to a good use--"

　　"What use?"

　　"That is an inviolable secret," she answered. "Have you no secrets?""I am the head of the family; I have my own affairs."

　　"And this is mine."

　　"It must be something bad if you can't tell it to your father,Mademoiselle Grandet."

　　"It is good, and I cannot tell it to my father."

　　"At least you can tell me when you parted with your gold?"Eugenie made a negative motion with her head.

　　"You had it on your birthday, hein?"

　　She grew as crafty through love as her father was through avarice, andreiterated the negative sign.

　　"Was there ever such obstinacy! It's a theft," cried Grandet, hisvoice going up in a crescendo which gradually echoed through thehouse. "What! here, in my own home, under my very eyes, somebody hastaken your gold!--the only gold we have!--and I'm not to know who hasgot it! Gold is a precious thing. Virtuous girls go wrong sometimes,and give--I don't know what; they do it among the great people, andeven among the bourgeoisie. But give their gold!--for you have givenit to some one, hein?--"

　　Eugenie was silent and impassive.

　　"Was there ever such a daughter? Is it possible that I am your father?If you have invested it anywhere, you must have a receipt--""Was I free--yes or no--to do what I would with my own? Was it notmine?"

　　"You are a child."

　　"Of age."

　　Dumbfounded by his daughter's logic, Grandet turned pale and stampedand swore. When at last he found words, he cried: "Serpent! Cursedgirl! Ah, deceitful creature! You know I love you, and you takeadvantage of it. She'd cut her father's throat! Good God! you've givenour fortune to that ne'er-do-well,--that dandy with morocco boots! Bythe shears of my father! I can't disinherit you, but I curse you,--youand your cousin and your children! Nothing good will come of it! Doyou hear? If it was to Charles--but, no; it's impossible. What! hasthat wretched fellow robbed me?--"

　　He looked at his daughter, who continued cold and silent."She won't stir; she won't flinch! She's more Grandet than I'mGrandet! Ha! you have not given your gold for nothing? Come, speak thetruth!"

　　Eugenie looked at her father with a sarcastic expression that stunghim.

　　"Eugenie, you are here, in my house,--in your father's house. If youwish to stay here, you must submit yourself to me. The priests tellyou to obey me." Eugenie bowed her head. "You affront me in all I holdmost dear. I will not see you again until you submit. Go to yourchamber. You will stay there till I give you permission to leave it.Nanon will bring you bread and water. You hear me--go!"

　　Eugenie burst into tears and fled up to her mother. Grandet, aftermarching two or three times round the garden in the snow withoutheeding the cold, suddenly suspected that his daughter had gone to hermother; only too happy to find her disobedient to his orders, heclimbed the stairs with the agility of a cat and appeared in MadameGrandet's room just as she was stroking Eugenie's hair, while thegirl's face was hidden in her motherly bosom.

　　"Be comforted, my poor child," she was saying; "your father will getover it."

　　"She has no father!" said the old man. "Can it be you and I, MadameGrandet, who have given birth to such a disobedient child? A fineeducation,--religious, too! Well! why are you not in your chamber?Come, to prison, to prison, mademoiselle!"

　　"Would you deprive me of my daughter, monsieur?" said Madame Grandet,turning towards him a face that was now red with fever.

　　"If you want to keep her, carry her off! Clear out--out of my house,both of you! Thunder! where is the gold? what's become of the gold?"Eugenie rose, looked proudly at her father, and withdrew to her room.Grandet turned the key of the door.

　　"Nanon," he cried, "put out the fire in the hall."

　　Then he sat down in an armchair beside his wife's fire and said toher,--

　　"Undoubtedly she has given the gold to that miserable seducer,Charles, who only wanted our money."

　　"I knew nothing about it," she answered, turning to the other side ofthe bed, that she might escape the savage glances of her husband. "Isuffer so much from your violence that I shall never leave this room,if I trust my own presentiments, till I am carried out of it in mycoffin. You ought to have spared me this suffering, monsieur,--you, towhom I have caused no pain; that is, I think so. Your daughter lovesyou. I believe her to be as innocent as the babe unborn. Do not makeher wretched. Revoke your sentence. The cold is very severe; you maygive her some serious illness."

　　"I will not see her, neither will I speak to her. She shall stay inher room, on bread and water, until she submits to her father. Whatthe devil! shouldn't a father know where the gold in his house hasgone to? She owned the only rupees in France, perhaps, and the Dutchducats and the /genovines/--"

　　"Monsieur, Eugenie is our only child; and even if she had thrown theminto the water--"

　　"Into the water!" cried her husband; "into the water! You are crazy,Madame Grandet! What I have said is said; you know that well enough.If you want peace in this household, make your daughter confess, pumpit out of her. Women understand how to do that better than we do.Whatever she has done, I sha'n't eat her. Is she afraid of me? Even ifshe has plastered Charles with gold from head to foot, he is on thehigh seas, and nobody can get at him, hein!"

　　"But, monsieur--" Excited by the nervous crisis through which she hadpassed, and by the fate of her daughter, which brought forth all hertenderness and all her powers of mind, Madame Grandet suddenlyobserved a frightful movement of her husband's wen, and, in the veryact of replying, she changed her speech without changing the tones ofher voice,--"But, monsieur, I have not more influence over her thanyou have. She has said nothing to me; she takes after you.""Tut, tut! Your tongue is hung in the middle this morning. Ta, ta, ta,ta! You are setting me at defiance, I do believe. I daresay you are inleague with her."

　　He looked fixedly at his wife.

　　"Monsieur Grandet, if you wish to kill me, you have only to go on likethis. I tell you, monsieur,--and if it were to cost me my life, Iwould say it,--you do wrong by your daughter; she is more in the rightthan you are. That money belonged to her; she is incapable of makingany but a good use of it, and God alone has the right to know our gooddeeds. Monsieur, I implore you, take Eugenie back into favor; forgiveher. If you will do this you will lessen the injury your anger hasdone me; perhaps you will save my life. My daughter! oh, monsieur,give me back my daughter!"

　　"I shall decamp," he said; "the house is not habitable. A mother anddaughter talking and arguing like that! Broooouh! Pouah! A fine NewYear's present you've made me, Eugenie," he called out. "Yes, yes, cryaway! What you've done will bring you remorse, do you hear? What's thegood of taking the sacrament six times every three months, if you giveaway your father's gold secretly to an idle fellow who'll eat yourheart out when you've nothing else to give him? You'll find out someday what your Charles is worth, with his morocco boots andsupercilious airs. He has got neither heart nor soul if he dared tocarry off a young girl's treasure without the consent of her parents."When the street-door was shut, Eugenie came out of her room and wentto her mother.

　　"What courage you have had for your daughter's sake!" she said."Ah! my child, see where forbidden things may lead us. You forced meto tell a lie."

　　"I will ask God to punish only me."

　　"Is it true," cried Nanon, rushing in alarmed, "that mademoiselle isto be kept on bread and water for the rest of her life?"

　　"What does that signify, Nanon?" said Eugenie tranquilly."Goodness! do you suppose I'll eat /frippe/ when the daughter of thehouse is eating dry bread? No, no!"

　　"Don't say a word about all this, Nanon," said Eugenie.

　　"I'll be as mute as a fish; but you'll see!"

　　*****

　　Grandet dined alone for the first time in twenty-four years."So you're a widower, monsieur," said Nanon; "it must be disagreeableto be a widower with two women in the house."

　　"I did not speak to you. Hold your jaw, or I'll turn you off! What isthat I hear boiling in your saucepan on the stove?"

　　"It is grease I'm trying out."

　　"There will be some company to-night. Light the fire."

　　The Cruchots, Madame des Grassins, and her son arrived at the usualhour of eight, and were surprised to see neither Madame Grandet norher daughter.

　　"My wife is not very well, and Eugenie is with her," said the oldwine-grower, whose face betrayed no emotion.

　　At the end of an hour spent in idle conversation, Madame des Grassins,who had gone up to see Madame Grandet, came down, and every oneinquired,--

　　"How is Madame Grandet?"

　　"Not at all well," she answered; "her condition seems to me reallyalarming. At her age you ought to take every precaution, PapaGrandet."

　　"We'll see about it," said the old man in an absent way.

　　They all wished him good-night. When the Cruchots got into the streetMadame des Grassins said to them,--

　　"There is something going on at the Grandets. The mother is very illwithout her knowing it. The girl's eyes are red, as if she had beencrying all day. Can they be trying to marry her against her will?"*****

　　When Grandet had gone to bed Nanon came softly to Eugenie's room inher stockinged feet and showed her a pate baked in a saucepan."See, mademoiselle," said the good soul, "Cornoiller gave me a hare.You eat so little that this pate will last you full a week; in suchfrosty weather it won't spoil. You sha'n't live on dry bread, I'mdetermined; it isn't wholesome."

　　"Poor Nanon!" said Eugenie, pressing her hand.

　　"I've made it downright good and dainty, and /he/ never found it out.I bought the lard and the spices out of my six francs: I'm themistress of my own money"; and she disappeared rapidly, fancying sheheard Grandet.

　　XI

　　For several months the old wine-grower came constantly to his wife'sroom at all hours of the day, without ever uttering his daughter'sname, or seeing her, or making the smallest allusion to her. MadameGrandet did not leave her chamber, and daily grew worse. Nothingsoftened the old man; he remained unmoved, harsh, and cold as agranite rock. He continued to go and come about his business as usual;but ceased to stutter, talked less, and was more obdurate in businesstransactions than ever before. Often he made mistakes in adding up hisfigures.

　　"Something is going on at the Grandets," said the Grassinists and theCruchotines.

　　"What has happened in the Grandet family?" became a fixed questionwhich everybody asked everybody else at the little evening-parties ofSaumur. Eugenie went to Mass escorted by Nanon. If Madame des Grassinssaid a few words to her on coming out of church, she answered in anevasive manner, without satisfying any curiosity. However, at the endof two months, it became impossible to hide, either from the threeCruchots or from Madame des Grassins, the fact that Eugenie was inconfinement. There came a moment when all pretexts failed to explainher perpetual absence. Then, though it was impossible to discover bywhom the secret had been betrayed, all the town became aware that eversince New Year's day Mademoiselle Grandet had been kept in her roomwithout fire, on bread and water, by her father's orders, and thatNanon cooked little dainties and took them to her secretly at night.It was even known that the young woman was not able to see or takecare of her mother, except at certain times when her father was out ofthe house.

　　Grandet's conduct was severely condemned. The whole town outlawed him,so to speak; they remembered his treachery, his hard-heartedness, andthey excommunicated him. When he passed along the streets, peoplepointed him out and muttered at him. When his daughter came down thewinding street, accompanied by Nanon, on her way to Mass or Vespers,the inhabitants ran to the windows and examined with intense curiositythe bearing of the rich heiress and her countenance, which bore theimpress of angelic gentleness and melancholy. Her imprisonment and thecondemnation of her father were as nothing to her. Had she not a mapof the world, the little bench, the garden, the angle of the wall? Didshe not taste upon her lips the honey that love's kisses left there?She was ignorant for a time that the town talked about her, just asGrandet himself was ignorant of it. Pious and pure in heart beforeGod, her conscience and her love helped her to suffer patiently thewrath and vengeance of her father.

　　One deep grief silenced all others. Her mother, that gentle, tendercreature, made beautiful by the light which shone from the inner tothe outer as she approached the tomb,--her mother was perishing fromday to day. Eugenie often reproached herself as the innocent cause ofthe slow, cruel malady that was wasting her away. This remorse, thoughher mother soothed it, bound her still closer to her love. Everymorning, as soon as her father left the house, she went to the bedsideof her mother, and there Nanon brought her breakfast. The poor girl,sad, and suffering through the sufferings of her mother, would turnher face to the old servant with a mute gesture, weeping, and yet notdaring to speak of her cousin. It was Madame Grandet who first foundcourage to say,--

　　"Where is /he/? Why does /he/ not write?"

　　"Let us think about him, mother, but not speak of him. You are ill--you, before all."

　　"All" meant "him."

　　"My child," said Madame Grandet, "I do not wish to live. God protectsme and enables me to look with joy to the end of my misery."Every utterance of this woman was unfalteringly pious and Christian.Sometimes, during the first months of the year, when her husband cameto breakfast with her and tramped up and down the room, she would sayto him a few religious words, always spoken with angelic sweetness,yet with the firmness of a woman to whom approaching death lends acourage she had lacked in life.

　　"Monsieur, I thank you for the interest you take in my health," shewould answer when he made some commonplace inquiry; "but if you reallydesire to render my last moments less bitter and to ease my grief,take back your daughter: be a Christian, a husband, and a father."When he heard these words, Grandet would sit down by the bed with theair of a man who sees the rain coming and quietly gets under theshelter of a gateway till it is over. When these touching, tender, andreligious supplications had all been made, he would say,--"You are rather pale to-day, my poor wife."

　　Absolute forgetfulness of his daughter seemed graven on his stonybrow, on his closed lips. He was unmoved by the tears which floweddown the white cheeks of his unhappy wife as she listened to hismeaningless answers.

　　"May God pardon you," she said, "even as I pardon you! You will someday stand in need of mercy."

　　Since Madame Grandet's illness he had not dared to make use of histerrible "Ta, ta, ta, ta!" Yet, for all that, his despotic nature wasnot disarmed by this angel of gentleness, whose ugliness day by daydecreased, driven out by the ineffable expression of moral qualitieswhich shone upon her face. She was all soul. The spirit of prayerseemed to purify her and refine those homely features and make themluminous. Who has not seen the phenomenon of a like transfiguration onsacred faces where the habits of the soul have triumphed over theplainest features, giving them that spiritual illumination whose lightcomes from the purity and nobility of the inward thought? Thespectacle of this transformation wrought by the struggle whichconsumed the last shreds of the human life of this woman, did somewhataffect the old cooper, though feebly, for his nature was of iron; ifhis language ceased to be contemptuous, an imperturbable silence,which saved his dignity as master of the household, took its place andruled his conduct.

　　When the faithful Nanon appeared in the market, many quips and quirksand complaints about the master whistled in her ears; but howeverloudly public opinion condemned Monsieur Grandet, the old servantdefended him, for the honor of the family.

　　"Well!" she would say to his detractors, "don't we all get hard as wegrow old? Why shouldn't he get horny too? Stop telling lies.Mademoiselle lives like a queen. She's alone, that's true; but shelikes it. Besides, my masters have good reasons."

　　At last, towards the end of spring, Madame Grandet, worn out by griefeven more than by illness, having failed, in spite of her prayers, toreconcile the father and daughter, confided her secret troubles to theCruchots.

　　"Keep a girl of twenty-three on bread and water!" cried Monsieur deBonfons; "without any reason, too! Why, that constitutes wrongfulcruelty; she can contest, as much in as upon--"

　　"Come, nephew, spare us your legal jargon," said the notary. "Set yourmind at ease, madame; I will put a stop to such treatment to-morrow."Eugenie, hearing herself mentioned, came out of her room."Gentlemen," she said, coming forward with a proud step, "I beg younot to interfere in this matter. My father is master in his own house.As long as I live under his roof I am bound to obey him. His conductis not subject to the approbation or the disapprobation of the world;he is accountable to God only. I appeal to your friendship to keeptotal silence in this affair. To blame my father is to attack ourfamily honor. I am much obliged to you for the interest you have shownin me; you will do me an additional service if you will put a stop tothe offensive rumors which are current in the town, of which I amaccidentally informed."

　　"She is right," said Madame Grandet.

　　"Mademoiselle, the best way to stop such rumors is to procure yourliberty," answered the old notary respectfully, struck with the beautywhich seclusion, melancholy, and love had stamped upon her face."Well, my daughter, let Monsieur Cruchot manage the matter if he is sosure of success. He understands your father, and how to manage him. Ifyou wish to see me happy for my few remaining days, you must, at anycost, be reconciled to your father."

　　On the morrow Grandet, in pursuance of a custom he had begun sinceEugenie's imprisonment, took a certain number of turns up and down thelittle garden; he had chosen the hour when Eugenie brushed andarranged her hair. When the old man reached the walnut-tree he hidbehind its trunk and remained for a few moments watching hisdaughter's movements, hesitating, perhaps, between the course to whichthe obstinacy of his character impelled him and his natural desire toembrace his child. Sometimes he sat down on the rotten old bench whereCharles and Eugenie had vowed eternal love; and then she, too, lookedat her father secretly in the mirror before which she stood. If herose and continued his walk, she sat down obligingly at the window andlooked at the angle of the wall where the pale flowers hung, where theVenus-hair grew from the crevices with the bindweed and the sedum,--awhite or yellow stone-crop very abundant in the vineyards of Saumurand at Tours. Maitre Cruchot came early, and found the old wine-growersitting in the fine June weather on the little bench, his back againstthe division wall of the garden, engaged in watching his daughter."What may you want, Maitre Cruchot?" he said, perceiving the notary."I came to speak to you on business."

　　"Ah! ah! have you brought some gold in exchange for my silver?""No, no, I have not come about money; it is about your daughterEugenie. All the town is talking of her and you."

　　"What does the town meddle for? A man's house is his castle.""Very true; and a man may kill himself if he likes, or, what is worse,he may fling his money into the gutter."

　　"What do you mean?"

　　"Why, your wife is very ill, my friend. You ought to consult MonsieurBergerin; she is likely to die. If she does die without receivingproper care, you will not be very easy in mind, I take it.""Ta, ta, ta, ta! you know a deal about my wife! These doctors, if theyonce get their foot in your house, will come five and six times aday."

　　"Of course you will do as you think best. We are old friends; there isno one in all Saumur who takes more interest than I in what concernsyou. Therefore, I was bound to tell you this. However, happen whatmay, you have the right to do as you please; you can choose your owncourse. Besides, that is not what brings me here. There is anotherthing which may have serious results for you. After all, you can'twish to kill your wife; her life is too important to you. Think ofyour situation in connection with your daughter if Madame Grandetdies. You must render an account to Eugenie, because you enjoy yourwife's estate only during her lifetime. At her death your daughter canclaim a division of property, and she may force you to sell Froidfond.In short, she is her mother's heir, and you are not."

　　These words fell like a thunderbolt on the old man, who was not aswise about law as he was about business. He had never thought of alegal division of the estate.

　　"Therefore I advise you to treat her kindly," added Cruchot, inconclusion.

　　"But do you know what she has done, Cruchot?"

　　"What?" asked the notary, curious to hear the truth and find out thecause of the quarrel.

　　"She has given away her gold!"

　　"Well, wasn't it hers?" said the notary.

　　"They all tell me that!" exclaimed the old man, letting his arms fallto his sides with a movement that was truly tragic.

　　"Are you going--for a mere nothing,"--resumed Cruchot, "to putobstacles in the way of the concessions which you will be obliged toask from your daughter as soon as her mother dies?"

　　"Do you call six thousand francs a mere nothing?"

　　"Hey! my old friend, do you know what the inventory of your wife'sproperty will cost, if Eugenie demands the division?"

　　"How much?"

　　"Two, three, four thousand francs, perhaps! The property would have tobe put up at auction and sold, to get at its actual value. Instead ofthat, if you are on good terms with--"

　　"By the shears of my father!" cried Grandet, turning pale as hesuddenly sat down, "we will see about it, Cruchot."

　　After a moment's silence, full of anguish perhaps, the old man lookedat the notary and said,--

　　"Life is very hard! It has many griefs! Cruchot," he continuedsolemnly, "you would not deceive me? Swear to me upon your honor thatall you've told me is legally true. Show me the law; I must see thelaw!"

　　"My poor friend," said the notary, "don't I know my own business?""Then it is true! I am robbed, betrayed, killed, destroyed by my owndaughter!"

　　"It is true that your daughter is her mother's heir."

　　"Why do we have children? Ah! my wife, I love her! Luckily she's soundand healthy; she's a Bertelliere."

　　"She has not a month to live."

　　Grandet struck his forehead, went a few steps, came back, cast adreadful look on Cruchot, and said,--

　　"What can be done?"

　　"Eugenie can relinquish her claim to her mother's property. Should shedo this you would not disinherit her, I presume?--but if you want tocome to such a settlement, you must not treat her harshly. What I amtelling you, old man, is against my own interests. What do I live by,if it isn't liquidations, inventories, conveyances, divisions ofproperty?--"

　　"We'll see, we'll see! Don't let's talk any more about it, Cruchot; itwrings my vitals. Have you received any gold?"

　　"No; but I have a few old louis, a dozen or so, which you may have. Mygood friend, make it up with Eugenie. Don't you know all Saumur ispelting you with stones?"

　　"The scoundrels!"

　　"Come, the Funds are at ninety-nine. Do be satisfied for once in yourlife."

　　"At ninety-nine! Are they, Cruchot?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Hey, hey! Ninety-nine!" repeated the old man, accompanying the notaryto the street-door. Then, too agitated by what he had just heard tostay in the house, he went up to his wife's room and said,--"Come, mother, you may have your daughter to spend the day with you.I'm going to Froidfond. Enjoy yourselves, both of you. This is ourwedding-day, wife. See! here are sixty francs for your altar at theFete-Dieu; you've wanted one for a long time. Come, cheer up, enjoyyourself, and get well! Hurrah for happiness!"

　　He threw ten silver pieces of six francs each upon the bed, and tookhis wife's head between his hands and kissed her forehead."My good wife, you are getting well, are not you?"

　　"How can you think of receiving the God of mercy in your house whenyou refuse to forgive your daughter?" she said with emotion."Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet in a coaxing voice. "We'll see aboutthat."

　　"Merciful heaven! Eugenie," cried the mother, flushing with joy, "comeand kiss your father; he forgives you!"

　　But the old man had disappeared. He was going as fast as his legscould carry him towards his vineyards, trying to get his confusedideas into order. Grandet had entered his seventy-sixth year. Duringthe last two years his avarice had increased upon him, as all thepersistent passions of men increase at a certain age. As if toillustrate an observation which applies equally to misers, ambitiousmen, and others whose lives are controlled by any dominant idea, hisaffections had fastened upon one special symbol of his passion. Thesight of gold, the possession of gold, had become a monomania. Hisdespotic spirit had grown in proportion to his avarice, and to partwith the control of the smallest fraction of his property at the deathof his wife seemed to him a thing "against nature." To declare hisfortune to his daughter, to give an inventory of his property, landedand personal, for the purposes of division--

　　"Why," he cried aloud in the midst of a field where he was pretendingto examine a vine, "it would be cutting my throat!"

　　He came at last to a decision, and returned to Saumur in time fordinner, resolved to unbend to Eugenie, and pet and coax her, that hemight die regally, holding the reins of his millions in his own handsso long as the breath was in his body. At the moment when the old man,who chanced to have his pass-key in his pocket, opened the door andclimbed with a stealthy step up the stairway to go into his wife'sroom, Eugenie had brought the beautiful dressing-case from the oakcabinet and placed it on her mother's bed. Mother and daughter, inGrandet's absence, allowed themselves the pleasure of looking for alikeness to Charles in the portrait of his mother.

　　"It is exactly his forehead and his mouth," Eugenie was saying as theold man opened the door. At the look which her husband cast upon thegold, Madame Grandet cried out,--

　　"O God, have pity upon us!"

　　The old man sprang upon the box as a famished tiger might spring upona sleeping child.

　　"What's this?" he said, snatching the treasure and carrying it to thewindow. "Gold, good gold!" he cried. "All gold,--it weighs two pounds!Ha, ha! Charles gave you that for your money, did he? Hein! Why didn'tyou tell me so? It was a good bargain, little one! Yes, you are mydaughter, I see that--" Eugenie trembled in every limb. "This camefrom Charles, of course, didn't it?" continued the old man."Yes, father; it is not mine. It is a sacred trust."

　　"Ta, ta, ta, ta! He took your fortune, and now you can get it back.""Father!"

　　Grandet took his knife to pry out some of the gold; to do this, heplaced the dressing-case on a chair. Eugenie sprang forward to recoverit; but her father, who had his eye on her and on the treasure too,pushed her back so violently with a thrust of his arm that she fellupon her mother's bed.

　　"Monsieur, monsieur!" cried the mother, lifting herself up.Grandet had opened his knife, and was about to apply it to the gold."Father!" cried Eugenie, falling on her knees and dragging herselfclose to him with clasped hands, "father, in the name of all thesaints and the Virgin! in the name of Christ who died upon the cross!in the name of your eternal salvation, father! for my life's sake,father!--do not touch that! It is neither yours nor mine. It is atrust placed in my hands by an unhappy relation: I must give it backto him uninjured!"

　　"If it is a trust, why were you looking at it? To look at it is as badas touching it."

　　"Father, don't destroy it, or you will disgrace me! Father, do youhear?"

　　"Oh, have pity!" said the mother.

　　"Father!" cried Eugenie in so startling a voice that Nanon ranupstairs terrified. Eugenie sprang upon a knife that was close athand.

　　"Well, what now?" said Grandet coldly, with a callous smile."Oh, you are killing me!" said the mother.

　　"Father, if your knife so much as cuts a fragment of that gold, I willstab myself with this one! You have already driven my mother to herdeath; you will now kill your child! Do as you choose! Wound forwound!"

　　Grandet held his knife over the dressing-case and hesitated as helooked at his daughter.

　　"Are you capable of doing it, Eugenie?" he said.

　　"Yes, yes!" said the mother.

　　"She'll do it if she says so!" cried Nanon. "Be reasonable, monsieur,for once in your life."

　　The old man looked at the gold and then at his daughter alternatelyfor an instant. Madame Grandet fainted.

　　"There! don't you see, monsieur, that madame is dying?" cried Nanon."Come, come, my daughter, we won't quarrel for a box! Here, take it!"he cried hastily, flinging the case upon the bed. "Nanon, go and fetchMonsieur Bergerin! Come, mother," said he, kissing his wife's hand,"it's all over! There! we've made up--haven't we, little one? No moredry bread; you shall have all you want--Ah, she opens her eyes! Well,mother, little mother, come! See, I'm kissing Eugenie! She loves hercousin, and she may marry him if she wants to; she may keep his case.But don't die, mother; live a long time yet, my poor wife! Come, tryto move! Listen! you shall have the finest altar that ever was made inSaumur."

　　"Oh, how can you treat your wife and daughter so!" said Madame Grandetin a feeble voice.

　　"I won't do so again, never again," cried her husband; "you shall see,my poor wife!" He went to his inner room and returned with a handfulof louis, which he scattered on the bed. "Here, Eugenie! see, wife!all these are for you," he said, fingering the coins. "Come, be happy,wife! feel better, get well; you sha'n't want for anything, norEugenie either. Here's a hundred /louis d'or/ for her. You won't givethese away, will you, Eugenie, hein?"

　　Madame Grandet and her daughter looked at each other in astonishment."Take back your money, father; we ask for nothing but your affection.""Well, well, that's right!" he said, pocketing the coins; "let's begood friends! We will all go down to dinner to-day, and we'll playloto every evening for two sous. You shall both be happy. Hey, wife?""Alas! I wish I could, if it would give you pleasure," said the dyingwoman; "but I cannot rise from my bed."

　　"Poor mother," said Grandet, "you don't know how I love you! and youtoo, my daughter!" He took her in his arms and kissed her. "Oh, howgood it is to kiss a daughter when we have been angry with her! There,mother, don't you see it's all over now? Go and put that away,Eugenie," he added, pointing to the case. "Go, don't be afraid! Ishall never speak of it again, never!"

　　Monsieur Bergerin, the celebrated doctor of Saumur, presently arrived.After an examination, he told Grandet positively that his wife wasvery ill; but that perfect peace of mind, a generous diet, and greatcare might prolong her life until the autumn.

　　"Will all that cost much?" said the old man. "Will she needmedicines?"

　　"Not much medicine, but a great deal of care," answered the doctor,who could scarcely restrain a smile.

　　"Now, Monsieur Bergerin," said Grandet, "you are a man of honor, arenot you? I trust to you! Come and see my wife how and when you thinknecessary. Save my good wife! I love her,--don't you see?--though Inever talk about it; I keep things to myself. I'm full of trouble.Troubles began when my brother died; I have to spend enormous sums onhis affairs in Paris. Why, I'm paying through my nose; there's no endto it. Adieu, monsieur! If you can save my wife, save her. I'll spareno expense, not even if it costs me a hundred or two hundred francs."In spite of Grandet's fervent wishes for the health of his wife, whosedeath threatened more than death to him; in spite of the considerationhe now showed on all occasions for the least wish of his astonishedwife and daughter; in spite of the tender care which Eugenie lavishedupon her mother,--Madame Grandet rapidly approached her end. Every dayshe grew weaker and wasted visibly, as women of her age when attackedby serious illness are wont to do. She was fragile as the foliage inautumn; the radiance of heaven shone through her as the sun strikesathwart the withering leaves and gilds them. It was a death worthy ofher life,--a Christian death; and is not that sublime? In the month ofOctober, 1822, her virtues, her angelic patience, her love for herdaughter, seemed to find special expression; and then she passed awaywithout a murmur. Lamb without spot, she went to heaven, regrettingonly the sweet companion of her cold and dreary life, for whom herlast glance seemed to prophesy a destiny of sorrows. She shrank fromleaving her ewe-lamb, white as herself, alone in the midst of aselfish world that sought to strip her of her fleece and grasp hertreasures.

　　"My child," she said as she expired, "there is no happiness except inheaven; you will know it some day."

　　XII

　　On the morrow of this death Eugenie felt a new motive for attachmentto the house in which she was born, where she had suffered so much,where her mother had just died. She could not see the window and thechair on its castors without weeping. She thought she had mistaken theheart of her old father when she found herself the object of histenderest cares. He came in the morning and gave her his arm to takeher to breakfast; he looked at her for hours together with an eye thatwas almost kind; he brooded over her as though she had been gold. Theold man was so unlike himself, he trembled so often before hisdaughter, that Nanon and the Cruchotines, who witnessed his weakness,attributed it to his great age, and feared that his faculties weregiving away. But the day on which the family put on their mourning,and after dinner, to which meal Maitre Cruchot (the only person whoknew his secret) had been invited, the conduct of the old miser wasexplained.

　　"My dear child," he said to Eugenie when the table had been clearedand the doors carefully shut, "you are now your mother's heiress, andwe have a few little matters to settle between us. Isn't that so,Cruchot?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Is it necessary to talk of them to-day, father?"

　　"Yes, yes, little one; I can't bear the uncertainty in which I'mplaced. I think you don't want to give me pain?"

　　"Oh! father--"

　　"Well, then! let us settle it all to-night."

　　"What is it you wish me to do?"

　　"My little girl, it is not for me to say. Tell her, Cruchot.""Mademoiselle, your father does not wish to divide the property, norsell the estate, nor pay enormous taxes on the ready money which hemay possess. Therefore, to avoid all this, he must be released frommaking the inventory of his whole fortune, part of which you inheritfrom your mother, and which is now undivided between you and yourfather--"

　　"Cruchot, are you quite sure of what you are saying before you tell itto a mere child?"

　　"Let me tell it my own way, Grandet."

　　"Yes, yes, my friend. Neither you nor my daughter wish to rob me,--doyou, little one?"

　　"But, Monsieur Cruchot, what am I to do?" said Eugenie impatiently."Well," said the notary, "it is necessary to sign this deed, by whichyou renounce your rights to your mother's estate and leave your fatherthe use and disposition, during his lifetime, of all the propertyundivided between you, of which he guarantees you the capital.""I do not understand a word of what you are saying," returned Eugenie;"give me the deed, and show me where I am to sign it."

　　Pere Grandet looked alternately at the deed and at his daughter, athis daughter and at the deed, undergoing as he did so such violentemotion that he wiped the sweat from his brow.

　　"My little girl," he said, "if, instead of signing this deed, whichwill cost a great deal to record, you would simply agree to renounceyour rights as heir to your poor dear, deceased mother's property, andwould trust to me for the future, I should like it better. In thatcase I will pay you monthly the good round sum of a hundred francs.See, now, you could pay for as many masses as you want for anybody--Hein! a hundred francs a month--in /livres/?"

　　"I will do all you wish, father."

　　"Mademoiselle," said the notary, "it is my duty to point out to youthat you are despoiling yourself without guarantee--"

　　"Good heavens! what is all that to me?"

　　"Hold your tongue, Cruchot! It's settled, all settled," cried Grandet,taking his daughter's hand and striking it with his own. "Eugenie, youwon't go back on your word?--you are an honest girl, hein?""Oh! father!--"

　　He kissed her effusively, and pressed her in his arms till he almostchoked her.

　　"Go, my good child, you restore your father's life; but you onlyreturn to him that which he gave you: we are quits. This is howbusiness should be done. Life is a business. I bless you! you are avirtuous girl, and you love your father. Do just what you like infuture. To-morrow, Cruchot," he added, looking at the horrifiednotary, "you will see about preparing the deed of relinquishment, andthen enter it on the records of the court."

　　The next morning Eugenie signed the papers by which she herselfcompleted her spoliation. At the end of the first year, however, inspite of his bargain, the old man had not given his daughter one souof the hundred francs he had so solemnly pledged to her. When Eugeniepleasantly reminded him of this, he could not help coloring, and wenthastily to his secret hiding-place, from whence he brought down abouta third of the jewels he had taken from his nephew, and gave them toher.

　　"There, little one," he said in a sarcastic tone, "do you want thosefor your twelve hundred francs?"

　　"Oh! father, truly? will you really give them to me?"

　　"I'll give you as many more next year," he said, throwing them intoher apron. "So before long you'll get all his gewgaws," he added,rubbing his hands, delighted to be able to speculate on his daughter'sfeelings.

　　Nevertheless, the old man, though still robust, felt the importance ofinitiating his daughter into the secrets of his thrift and itsmanagement. For two consecutive years he made her order the householdmeals in his presence and receive the rents, and he taught her slowlyand successively the names and remunerative capacity of his vineyardsand his farms. About the third year he had so thoroughly accustomedher to his avaricious methods that they had turned into the settledhabits of her own life, and he was able to leave the household keys inher charge without anxiety, and to install her as mistress of thehouse.

　　*****

　　Five years passed away without a single event to relieve themonotonous existence of Eugenie and her father. The same actions wereperformed daily with the automatic regularity of clockwork. The deepsadness of Mademoiselle Grandet was known to every one; but if otherssurmised the cause, she herself never uttered a word that justifiedthe suspicions which all Saumur entertained about the state of therich heiress's heart. Her only society was made up of the threeCruchots and a few of their particular friends whom they had, littleby little, introduced into the Grandet household. They had taught herto play whist, and they came every night for their game. During theyear 1827 her father, feeling the weight of his infirmities, wasobliged to initiate her still further into the secrets of his landedproperty, and told her that in case of difficulty she was to haverecourse to Maitre Cruchot, whose integrity was well known to him.Towards the end of this year the old man, then eighty-two, was seizedby paralysis, which made rapid progress. Dr. Bergerin gave him up.Eugenie, feeling that she was about to be left alone in the world,came, as it were, nearer to her father, and clasped more tightly thislast living link of affection. To her mind, as in that of all lovingwomen, love was the whole of life. Charles was not there, and shedevoted all her care and attention to the old father, whose facultieshad begun to weaken, though his avarice remained instinctively acute.The death of this man offered no contrast to his life. In the morninghe made them roll him to a spot between the chimney of his chamber andthe door of the secret room, which was filled, no doubt, with gold. Heasked for an explanation of every noise he heard, even the slightest;to the great astonishment of the notary, he even heard the watch-dogyawning in the court-yard. He woke up from his apparent stupor at theday and hour when the rents were due, or when accounts had to besettled with his vine-dressers, and receipts given. At such times heworked his chair forward on its castors until he faced the door of theinner room. He made his daughter open it, and watched while she placedthe bags of money one upon another in his secret receptacles andrelocked the door. Then she returned silently to her seat, aftergiving him the key, which he replaced in his waistcoat pocket andfingered from time to time. His old friend the notary, feeling surethat the rich heiress would inevitably marry his nephew the president,if Charles Grandet did not return, redoubled all his attentions; hecame every day to take Grandet's orders, went on his errands toFroidfond, to the farms and the fields and the vineyards, sold thevintages, and turned everything into gold and silver, which foundtheir way in sacks to the secret hiding-place.

　　At length the last struggle came, in which the strong frame of the oldman slowly yielded to destruction. He was determined to sit at thechimney-corner facing the door of the secret room. He drew off androlled up all the coverings which were laid over him, saying to Nanon,"Put them away, lock them up, for fear they should be stolen."So long as he could open his eyes, in which his whole being had nowtaken refuge, he turned them to the door behind which lay histreasures, saying to his daughter, "Are they there? are they there?"in a tone of voice which revealed a sort of panic fear.

　　"Yes, my father," she would answer.

　　"Take care of the gold--put gold before me."

　　Eugenie would then spread coins on a table before him, and he wouldsit for hours together with his eyes fixed upon them, like a childwho, at the moment it first begins to see, gazes in stupidcontemplation at the same object, and like the child, a distressfulsmile would flicker upon his face.

　　"It warms me!" he would sometimes say, as an expression of beatitudestole across his features.

　　When the cure of the parish came to administer the last sacraments,the old man's eyes, sightless, apparently, for some hours, kindled atthe sight of the cross, the candlesticks, and the holy-water vessel ofsilver; he gazed at them fixedly, and his wen moved for the last time.When the priest put the crucifix of silver-gilt to his lips, that hemight kiss the Christ, he made a frightful gesture, as if to seize it;and that last effort cost him his life. He called Eugenie, whom he didnot see, though she was kneeling beside him bathing with tears hisstiffening hand, which was already cold.

　　"My father, bless me!" she entreated.

　　"Take care of it all. You will render me an account yonder!" he said,proving by these last words that Christianity must always be thereligion of misers.

　　*****

　　Eugenie Grandet was now alone in the world in that gray house, withnone but Nanon to whom she could turn with the certainty of beingheard and understood,--Nanon the sole being who loved her for herselfand with whom she could speak of her sorrows. La Grande Nanon was aprovidence for Eugenie. She was not a servant, but a humble friend.After her father's death Eugenie learned from Maitre Cruchot that shepossessed an income of three hundred thousand francs from landed andpersonal property in the arrondissement of Saumur; also six millionsinvested at three per cent in the Funds (bought at sixty, and nowworth seventy-six francs); also two millions in gold coin, and ahundred thousand francs in silver crown-pieces, besides all theinterest which was still to be collected. The sum total of herproperty reached seventeen millions.

　　"Where is my cousin?" was her one thought.

　　The day on which Maitre Cruchot handed in to his client a clear andexact schedule of the whole inheritance, Eugenie remained alone withNanon, sitting beside the fireplace in the vacant hall, where all wasnow a memory, from the chair on castors which her mother had sat in,to the glass from which her cousin drank.

　　"Nanon, we are alone--"

　　"Yes, mademoiselle; and if I knew where he was, the darling, I'd go onfoot to find him."

　　"The ocean is between us," she said.

　　While the poor heiress wept in company of an old servant, in that colddark house, which was to her the universe, the whole province rang,from Nantes to Orleans, with the seventeen millions of MademoiselleGrandet. Among her first acts she had settled an annuity of twelvehundred francs on Nanon, who, already possessed of six hundred more,became a rich and enviable match. In less than a month that good soulpassed from single to wedded life under the protection of AntoineCornoiller, who was appointed keeper of all Mademoiselle Grandet'sestates. Madame Cornoiller possessed one striking advantage over hercontemporaries. Although she was fifty-nine years of age, she did notlook more than forty. Her strong features had resisted the ravages oftime. Thanks to the healthy customs of her semi-conventual life, shelaughed at old age from the vantage-ground of a rosy skin and an ironconstitution. Perhaps she never looked as well in her life as she didon her marriage-day. She had all the benefits of her ugliness, and wasbig and fat and strong, with a look of happiness on her indestructiblefeatures which made a good many people envy Cornoiller.

　　"Fast colors!" said the draper.

　　"Quite likely to have children," said the salt merchant. "She'spickled in brine, saving your presence."

　　"She is rich, and that fellow Cornoiller has done a good thing forhimself," said a third man.

　　When she came forth from the old house on her way to the parishchurch, Nanon, who was loved by all the neighborhood, received manycompliments as she walked down the tortuous street. Eugenie had givenher three dozen silver forks and spoons as a wedding present.Cornoiller, amazed at such magnificence, spoke of his mistress withtears in his eyes; he would willingly have been hacked in pieces inher behalf. Madame Cornoiller, appointed housekeeper to MademoiselleGrandet, got as much happiness out of her new position as she did fromthe possession of a husband. She took charge of the weekly accounts;she locked up the provisions and gave them out daily, after the mannerof her defunct master; she ruled over two servants,--a cook, and amaid whose business it was to mend the house-linen and makemademoiselle's dresses. Cornoiller combined the functions of keeperand bailiff. It is unnecessary to say that the women-servants selectedby Nanon were "perfect treasures." Mademoiselle Grandet thus had fourservants, whose devotion was unbounded. The farmers perceived nochange after Monsieur Grandet's death; the usages and customs he hadsternly established were scrupulously carried out by Monsieur andMadame Cornoiller.

　　At thirty years of age Eugenie knew none of the joys of life. Herpale, sad childhood had glided on beside a mother whose heart, alwaysmisunderstood and wounded, had known only suffering. Leaving this lifejoyfully, the mother pitied the daughter because she still must live;and she left in her child's soul some fugitive remorse and manylasting regrets. Eugenie's first and only love was a wellspring ofsadness within her. Meeting her lover for a few brief days, she hadgiven him her heart between two kisses furtively exchanged; then hehad left her, and a whole world lay between them. This love, cursed byher father, had cost the life of her mother and brought her onlysorrow, mingled with a few frail hopes. Thus her upward spring towardshappiness had wasted her strength and given her nothing in exchangefor it. In the life of the soul, as in the physical life, there is aninspiration and a respiration; the soul needs to absorb the sentimentsof another soul and assimilate them, that it may render them backenriched. Were it not for this glorious human phenomenon, there wouldbe no life for the heart; air would be wanting; it would suffer, andthen perish. Eugenie had begun to suffer. For her, wealth was neithera power nor a consolation; she could not live except through love,through religion, through faith in the future. Love explained to herthe mysteries of eternity. Her heart and the Gospel taught her to knowtwo worlds; she bathed, night and day, in the depths of two infinitethoughts, which for her may have had but one meaning. She drew backwithin herself, loving, and believing herself beloved. For seven yearsher passion had invaded everything. Her treasuries were not themillions whose revenues were rolling up; they were Charles's dressing-case, the portraits hanging above her bed, the jewels recovered fromher father and proudly spread upon a bed of wool in a drawer of theoaken cabinet, the thimble of her aunt, used for a while by hermother, which she wore religiously as she worked at a piece ofembroidery,--a Penelope's web, begun for the sole purpose of puttingupon her finger that gold so rich in memories.

　　It seemed unlikely that Mademoiselle Grandet would marry during theperiod of her mourning. Her genuine piety was well known. Consequentlythe Cruchots, whose policy was sagely guided by the old abbe,contented themselves for the time being with surrounding the greatheiress and paying her the most affectionate attentions. Every eveningthe hall was filled with a party of devoted Cruchotines, who sang thepraises of its mistress in every key. She had her doctor in ordinary,her grand almoner, her chamberlain, her first lady of honor, her primeminister; above all, her chancellor, a chancellor who would fain havesaid much to her. If the heiress had wished for a train-bearer, onewould instantly have been found. She was a queen, obsequiouslyflattered. Flattery never emanates from noble souls; it is the gift oflittle minds, who thus still further belittle themselves to worm theirway into the vital being of the persons around whom they crawl.Flattery means self-interest. So the people who, night after night,assembled in Mademoiselle Grandet's house (they called herMademoiselle de Froidfond) outdid each other in expressions ofadmiration. This concert of praise, never before bestowed uponEugenie, made her blush under its novelty; but insensibly her earbecame habituated to the sound, and however coarse the complimentsmight be, she soon was so accustomed to hear her beauty lauded that ifany new-comer had seemed to think her plain, she would have felt thereproach far more than she might have done eight years earlier. Sheended at last by loving the incense, which she secretly laid at thefeet of her idol. By degrees she grew accustomed to be treated as asovereign and to see her court pressing around her every evening.Monsieur de Bonfons was the hero of the little circle, where his wit,his person, his education, his amiability, were perpetually praised.One or another would remark that in seven years he had largelyincreased his fortune, that Bonfons brought in at least ten thousandfrancs a year, and was surrounded, like the other possessions of theCruchots, by the vast domains of the heiress.

　　"Do you know, mademoiselle," said an habitual visitor, "that theCruchots have an income of forty thousand francs among them!""And then, their savings!" exclaimed an elderly female Cruchotine,Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt.

　　"A gentleman from Paris has lately offered Monsieur Cruchot twohundred thousand francs for his practice," said another. "He will sellit if he is appointed /juge de paix/."

　　"He wants to succeed Monsieur de Bonfons as president of the Civilcourts, and is taking measures," replied Madame d'Orsonval. "Monsieurle president will certainly be made councillor."

　　"Yes, he is a very distinguished man," said another,--"don't you thinkso, mademoiselle?"

　　Monsieur de Bonfons endeavored to put himself in keeping with the rolehe sought to play. In spite of his forty years, in spite of his duskyand crabbed features, withered like most judicial faces, he dressed inyouthful fashions, toyed with a bamboo cane, never took snuff inMademoiselle de Froidfond's house, and came in a white cravat and ashirt whose pleated frill gave him a family resemblance to the race ofturkeys. He addressed the beautiful heiress familiarly, and spoke ofher as "Our dear Eugenie." In short, except for the number ofvisitors, the change from loto to whist, and the disappearance ofMonsieur and Madame Grandet, the scene was about the same as the onewith which this history opened. The pack were still pursuing Eugenieand her millions; but the hounds, more in number, lay better on thescent, and beset the prey more unitedly. If Charles could have droppedfrom the Indian Isles, he would have found the same people and thesame interests. Madame des Grassins, to whom Eugenie was full ofkindness and courtesy, still persisted in tormenting the Cruchots.Eugenie, as in former days, was the central figure of the picture; andCharles, as heretofore, would still have been the sovereign of all.Yet there had been some progress. The flowers which the presidentformerly presented to Eugenie on her birthdays and fete-days had nowbecome a daily institution. Every evening he brought the rich heiressa huge and magnificent bouquet, which Madame Cornoiller placedconspicuously in a vase, and secretly threw into a corner of thecourt-yard when the visitors had departed.

　　Early in the spring, Madame des Grassins attempted to trouble thepeace of the Cruchotines by talking to Eugenie of the Marquis deFroidfond, whose ancient and ruined family might be restored if theheiress would give him back his estates through marriage. Madame desGrassins rang the changes on the peerage and the title of marquise,until, mistaking Eugenie's disdainful smile for acquiescence, she wentabout proclaiming that the marriage with "Monsieur Cruchot" was notnearly as certain as people thought.

　　"Though Monsieur de Froidfond is fifty," she said, "he does not lookolder than Monsieur Cruchot. He is a widower, and he has children,that's true. But then he is a marquis; he will be peer of France; andin times like these where you will find a better match? I know it fora fact that Pere Grandet, when he put all his money into Froidfond,intended to graft himself upon that stock; he often told me so. He wasa deep one, that old man!"

　　"Ah! Nanon," said Eugenie, one night as she was going to bed, "how isit that in seven years he has never once written to me?"

　　XIII

　　While these events were happening in Saumur, Charles was making hisfortune in the Indies. His commercial outfit had sold well. He beganby realizing a sum of six thousand dollars. Crossing the line hadbrushed a good many cobwebs out of his brain; he perceived that thebest means of attaining fortune in tropical regions, as well as inEurope, was to buy and sell men. He went to the coast of Africa andbought Negroes, combining his traffic in human flesh with that ofother merchandise equally advantageous to his interests. He carriedinto this business an activity which left him not a moment of leisure.He was governed by the desire of reappearing in Paris with all theprestige of a large fortune, and by the hope of regaining a positioneven more brilliant than the one from which he had fallen.By dint of jostling with men, travelling through many lands, andstudying a variety of conflicting customs, his ideas had been modifiedand had become sceptical. He ceased to have fixed principles of rightand wrong, for he saw what was called a crime in one country lauded asa virtue in another. In the perpetual struggle of selfish interestshis heart grew cold, then contracted, and then dried up. The blood ofthe Grandets did not fail of its destiny; Charles became hard, andeager for prey. He sold Chinamen, Negroes, birds' nests, children,artists; he practised usury on a large scale; the habit of defraudingcustom-houses soon made him less scrupulous about the rights of hisfellow men. He went to the Island of St. Thomas and bought, for a meresong, merchandise that had been captured by pirates, and took it toports where he could sell it at a good price. If the pure and nobleface of Eugenie went with him on his first voyage, like that image ofthe Virgin which Spanish mariners fastened to their masts, if heattributed his first success to the magic influence of the prayers andintercessions of his gentle love, later on women of other kinds,--blacks, mulattoes, whites, and Indian dancing-girls,--orgies andadventures in many lands, completely effaced all recollection of hiscousin, of Saumur, of the house, the bench, the kiss snatched in thedark passage. He remembered only the little garden shut in withcrumbling walls, for it was there he learned the fate that hadovertaken him; but he rejected all connection with his family. Hisuncle was an old dog who had filched his jewels; Eugenie had no placein his heart nor in his thoughts, though she did have a place in hisaccounts as a creditor for the sum of six thousand francs.Such conduct and such ideas explain Charles Grandet's silence. In theIndies, at St. Thomas, on the coast of Africa, at Lisbon, and in theUnited States the adventurer had taken the pseudonym of Shepherd, thathe might not compromise his own name. Charles Shepherd could safely beindefatigable, bold, grasping, and greedy of gain, like a man whoresolves to snatch his fortune /quibus cumque viis/, and makes hasteto have done with villany, that he may spend the rest of his life asan honest man.

　　With such methods, prosperity was rapid and brilliant; and in 1827Charles Grandet returned to Bordeaux on the "Marie Caroline," a finebrig belonging to a royalist house of business. He brought with himnineteen hundred thousand francs worth of gold-dust, from which heexpected to derive seven or eight per cent more at the Paris mint. Onthe brig he met a gentleman-in-ordinary to His Majesty Charles X.,Monsieur d'Aubrion, a worthy old man who had committed the folly ofmarrying a woman of fashion with a fortune derived from the West IndiaIslands. To meet the costs of Madame d'Aubrion's extravagance, he hadgone out to the Indies to sell the property, and was now returningwith his family to France.

　　Monsieur and Madame d'Aubrion, of the house of d'Aubrion de Buch, afamily of southern France, whose last /captal/, or chief, died before1789, were now reduced to an income of about twenty thousand francs,and they possessed an ugly daughter whom the mother was resolved tomarry without a /dot/,--the family fortune being scarcely sufficientfor the demands of her own life in Paris. This was an enterprise whosesuccess might have seemed problematical to most men of the world, inspite of the cleverness with which such men credit a fashionablewoman; in fact, Madame d'Aubrion herself, when she looked at herdaughter, almost despaired of getting rid of her to any one, even to aman craving connection with nobility. Mademoiselle d'Aubrion was along, spare, spindling demoiselle, like her namesake the insect; hermouth was disdainful; over it hung a nose that was too long, thick atthe end, sallow in its normal condition, but very red after a meal,--asort of vegetable phenomenon which is particularly disagreeable whenit appears in the middle of a pale, dull, and uninteresting face. Inone sense she was all that a worldly mother, thirty-eight years of ageand still a beauty with claims to admiration, could have wished.However, to counterbalance her personal defects, the marquise gave herdaughter a distinguished air, subjected her to hygienic treatmentwhich provisionally kept her nose at a reasonable flesh-tint, taughther the art of dressing well, endowed her with charming manners,showed her the trick of melancholy glances which interest a man andmake him believe that he has found a long-sought angel, taught her themanoeuvre of the foot,--letting it peep beneath the petticoat, to showits tiny size, at the moment when the nose became aggressively red; inshort, Madame d'Aubrion had cleverly made the very best of heroffspring. By means of full sleeves, deceptive pads, puffed dressesamply trimmed, and high-pressure corsets, she had obtained suchcurious feminine developments that she ought, for the instruction ofmothers, to have exhibited them in a museum.

　　Charles became very intimate with Madame d'Aubrion precisely becauseshe was desirous of becoming intimate with him. Persons who were onboard the brig declared that the handsome Madame d'Aubrion neglectedno means of capturing so rich a son-in-law. On landing at Bordeaux inJune, 1827, Monsieur, Madame, Mademoiselle d'Aubrion, and Charleslodged at the same hotel and started together for Paris. The hoteld'Aubrion was hampered with mortgages; Charles was destined to freeit. The mother told him how delighted she would be to give up theground-floor to a son-in-law. Not sharing Monsieur d'Aubrion'sprejudices on the score of nobility, she promised Charles Grandet toobtain a royal ordinance from Charles X. which would authorize him,Grandet, to take the name and arms of d'Aubrion and to succeed, bypurchasing the entailed estate for thirty-six thousand francs a year,to the titles of Captal de Buch and Marquis d'Aubrion. By thus unitingtheir fortunes, living on good terms, and profiting by sinecures, thetwo families might occupy the hotel d'Aubrion with an income of over ahundred thousand francs.

　　"And when a man has a hundred thousand francs a year, a name, afamily, and a position at court,--for I will get you appointed asgentleman-of-the-bedchamber,--he can do what he likes," she said toCharles. "You can then become anything you choose,--master of therolls in the council of State, prefect, secretary to an embassy, theambassador himself, if you like. Charles X. is fond of d'Aubrion; theyhave known each other from childhood."

　　Intoxicated with ambition, Charles toyed with the hopes thus cleverlypresented to him in the guise of confidences poured from heart toheart. Believing his father's affairs to have been settled by hisuncle, he imagined himself suddenly anchored in the Faubourg Saint-Germain,--that social object of all desire, where, under shelter ofMademoiselle Mathilde's purple nose, he was to reappear as the Comted'Aubrion, very much as the Dreux reappeared in Breze. Dazzled by theprosperity of the Restoration, which was tottering when he leftFrance, fascinated by the splendor of aristocratic ideas, hisintoxication, which began on the brig, increased after he reachedParis, and he finally determined to take the course and reach the highposition which the selfish hopes of his would-be mother-in-law pointedout to him. His cousin counted for no more than a speck in thisbrilliant perspective; but he went to see Annette. True woman of theworld, Annette advised her old friend to make the marriage, andpromised him her support in all his ambitious projects. In her heartshe was enchanted to fasten an ugly and uninteresting girl on Charles,whose life in the West Indies had rendered him very attractive. Hiscomplexion had bronzed, his manners had grown decided and bold, likethose of a man accustomed to make sharp decisions, to rule, and tosucceed. Charles breathed more at his ease in Paris, conscious that henow had a part to play.

　　Des Grassins, hearing of his return, of his approaching marriage andhis large fortune, came to see him, and inquired about the threehundred thousand francs still required to settle his father's debts.He found Grandet in conference with a goldsmith, from whom he hadordered jewels for Mademoiselle d'Aubrion's /corbeille/, and who wasthen submitting the designs. Charles had brought back magnificentdiamonds, and the value of their setting, together with the plate andjewelry of the new establishment, amounted to more than two hundredthousand francs. He received des Grassins, whom he did not recognize,with the impertinence of a young man of fashion conscious of havingkilled four men in as many duels in the Indies. Monsieur des Grassinshad already called several times. Charles listened to him coldly, andthen replied, without fully understanding what had been said to him,--"My father's affairs are not mine. I am much obliged, monsieur, forthe trouble you have been good enough to take,--by which, however, Ireally cannot profit. I have not earned two millions by the sweat ofmy brow to fling them at the head of my father's creditors.""But suppose that your father's estate were within a few days to bedeclared bankrupt?"

　　"Monsieur, in a few days I shall be called the Comte d'Aubrion; youwill understand, therefore, that what you threaten is of noconsequence to me. Besides, you know as well as I do that when a manhas an income of a hundred thousand francs his father has /neverfailed/." So saying, he politely edged Monsieur des Grassins to thedoor.

　　*****

　　At the beginning of August in the same year, Eugenie was sitting onthe little wooden bench where her cousin had sworn to love hereternally, and where she usually breakfasted if the weather were fine.The poor girl was happy, for the moment, in the fresh and joyoussummer air, letting her memory recall the great and the little eventsof her love and the catastrophes which had followed it. The sun hadjust reached the angle of the ruined wall, so full of chinks, which noone, through a caprice of the mistress, was allowed to touch, thoughCornoiller often remarked to his wife that "it would fall and crushsomebody one of these days." At this moment the postman knocked, andgave a letter to Madame Cornoiller, who ran into the garden, cryingout:

　　"Mademoiselle, a letter!" She gave it to her mistress, adding, "Is itthe one you expected?"

　　The words rang as loudly in the heart of Eugenie as they echoed insound from wall to wall of the court and garden.

　　"Paris--from him--he has returned!"

　　Eugenie turned pale and held the letter for a moment. She trembled soviolently that she could not break the seal. La Grande Nanon stoodbefore her, both hands on her hips, her joy puffing as it were likesmoke through the cracks of her brown face.

　　"Read it, mademoiselle!"

　　"Ah, Nanon, why did he return to Paris? He went from Saumur.""Read it, and you'll find out."

　　Eugenie opened the letter with trembling fingers. A cheque on thehouse of "Madame des Grassins and Coret, of Saumur," fluttered down.Nanon picked it up.

　　My dear Cousin,--

　　"No longer 'Eugenie,'" she thought, and her heart quailed.

　　You--

　　"He once said 'thou.'" She folded her arms and dared not read anotherword; great tears gathered in her eyes.

　　"Is he dead?" asked Nanon.

　　"If he were, he could not write," said Eugenie.

　　She then read the whole letter, which was as follows:

　　My dear Cousin,--You will, I am sure, hear with pleasure of the

　　success of my enterprise. You brought me luck; I have come back

　　rich, and I have followed the advice of my uncle, whose death,

　　together with that of my aunt, I have just learned from Monsieur

　　des Grassins. The death of parents is in the course of nature, and

　　we must succeed them. I trust you are by this time consoled.

　　Nothing can resist time, as I am well aware. Yes, my dear cousin,

　　the day of illusions is, unfortunately, gone for me. How could it

　　be otherwise? Travelling through many lands, I have reflected upon

　　life. I was a child when I went away,--I have come back a man.

　　To-day, I think of many I did not dream of then. You are free, my

　　dear cousin, and I am free still. Nothing apparently hinders the

　　realization of our early hopes; but my nature is too loyal to hide

　　from you the situation in which I find myself. I have not

　　forgotten our relations; I have always remembered, throughout my

　　long wanderings, the little wooden seat--

　　Eugenie rose as if she were sitting on live coals, and went away andsat down on the stone steps of the court.

　　--the little wooden seat where we vowed to love each other

　　forever, the passage, the gray hall, my attic chamber, and the

　　night when, by your delicate kindness, you made my future easier

　　to me. Yes, these recollections sustained my courage; I said in my

　　heart that you were thinking of me at the hour we had agreed upon.

　　Have you always looked at the clouds at nine o'clock? Yes, I am

　　sure of it. I cannot betray so true a friendship,--no, I must not

　　deceive you. An alliance has been proposed to me which satisfies

　　all my ideas of matrimony. Love in marriage is a delusion. My

　　present experience warns me that in marrying we are bound to obey

　　all social laws and meet the conventional demands of the world.

　　Now, between you and me there are differences which might affect

　　your future, my dear cousin, even more than they would mine. I

　　will not here speak of your customs and inclinations, your

　　education, nor yet of your habits, none of which are in keeping

　　with Parisian life, or with the future which I have marked out for

　　myself. My intention is to keep my household on a stately footing,

　　to receive much company,--in short, to live in the world; and I

　　think I remember that you love a quiet and tranquil life. I will

　　be frank, and make you the judge of my situation; you have the

　　right to understand it and to judge it.

　　I possess at the present moment an income of eighty thousand

　　francs. This fortune enables me to marry into the family of

　　Aubrion, whose heiress, a young girl nineteen years of age, brings

　　me a title, a place of gentleman-of-the-bed-chamber to His

　　Majesty, and a very brilliant position. I will admit to you, my

　　dear cousin, that I do not love Mademoiselle d'Aubrion; but in

　　marrying her I secure to my children a social rank whose

　　advantages will one day be incalculable: monarchical principles

　　are daily coming more and more into favor. Thus in course of time

　　my son, when he becomes Marquis d'Aubrion, having, as he then will

　　have, an entailed estate with a rental of forty thousand francs a

　　year, can obtain any position in the State which he may think

　　proper to select. We owe ourselves to our children.

　　You see, my cousin, with what good faith I lay the state of my

　　heart, my hopes, and my fortune before you. Possibly, after seven

　　years' separation, you have yourself forgotten our youthful loves;

　　but I have never forgotten either your kindness or my own words. I

　　remember all, even words that were lightly uttered,--words by

　　which a man less conscientious than I, with a heart less youthful

　　and less upright, would scarcely feel himself bound. In telling

　　you that the marriage I propose to make is solely one of

　　convenience, that I still remember our childish love, am I not

　　putting myself entirely in your hands and making you the mistress

　　of my fate? am I not telling you that if I must renounce my social

　　ambitions, I shall willingly content myself with the pure and

　　simple happiness of which you have shown me so sweet an image?"Tan, ta, ta--tan, ta, ti," sang Charles Grandet to the air of /Nonpiu andrai/, as he signed himself,--

　　Your devoted cousin,

　　Charles.

　　"Thunder! that's doing it handsomely!" he said, as he looked about himfor the cheque; having found it, he added the words:--

　　P.S.--I enclose a cheque on the des Grassins bank for eight

　　thousand francs to your order, payable in gold, which includes the

　　capital and interest of the sum you were kind enough to lend me. I

　　am expecting a case from Bordeaux which contains a few things

　　which you must allow me to offer you as a mark of my unceasing

　　gratitude. You can send my dressing-case by the diligence to the

　　hotel d'Aubrion, rue Hillerin-Bertin.

　　"By the diligence!" said Eugenie. "A thing for which I would have laiddown my life!"

　　Terrible and utter disaster! The ship went down, leaving not a spar,not a plank, on a vast ocean of hope! Some women when they seethemselves abandoned will try to tear their lover from the arms of arival, they will kill her, and rush to the ends of the earth,--to thescaffold, to their tomb. That, no doubt, is fine; the motive of thecrime is a great passion, which awes even human justice. Other womenbow their heads and suffer in silence; they go their way dying,resigned, weeping, forgiving, praying, and recollecting, till theydraw their last breath. This is love,--true love, the love of angels,the proud love which lives upon its anguish and dies of it. Such wasEugenie's love after she had read that dreadful letter. She raised hereyes to heaven, thinking of the last words uttered by her dyingmother, who, with the prescience of death, had looked into the futurewith clear and penetrating eyes: Eugenie, remembering that propheticdeath, that prophetic life, measured with one glance her own destiny.Nothing was left for her; she could only unfold her wings, stretchupward to the skies, and live in prayer until the day of herdeliverance.

　　"My mother was right," she said, weeping. "Suffer--and die!"XIV

　　Eugenie came slowly back from the garden to the house, and avoidedpassing, as was her custom, through the corridor. But the memory ofher cousin was in the gray old hall and on the chimney-piece, wherestood a certain saucer and the old Sevres sugar-bowl which she usedevery morning at her breakfast.

　　This day was destined to be solemn throughout and full of events.Nanon announced the cure of the parish church. He was related to theCruchots, and therefore in the interests of Monsieur de Bonfons. Forsome time past the old abbe had urged him to speak to MademoiselleGrandet, from a purely religious point of view, about the duty ofmarriage for a woman in her position. When she saw her pastor, Eugeniesupposed he had come for the thousand francs which she gave monthly tothe poor, and she told Nanon to go and fetch them; but the cure onlysmiled.

　　"To-day, mademoiselle," he said, "I have come to speak to you about apoor girl in whom the whole town of Saumur takes an interest, who,through lack of charity to herself, neglects her Christian duties.""Monsieur le cure, you have come to me at a moment when I cannot thinkof my neighbor, I am filled with thoughts of myself. I am veryunhappy; my only refuge is in the Church; her bosom is large enough tohold all human woe, her love so full that we may draw from its depthsand never drain it dry."

　　"Mademoiselle, in speaking of this young girl we shall speak of you.Listen! If you wish to insure your salvation you have only two pathsto take,--either leave the world or obey its laws. Obey either yourearthly destiny or your heavenly destiny."

　　"Ah! your voice speaks to me when I need to hear a voice. Yes, God hassent you to me; I will bid farewell to the world and live for Godalone, in silence and seclusion."

　　"My daughter, you must think long before you take so violent a step.Marriage is life, the veil is death."

　　"Yes, death,--a quick death!" she said, with dreadful eagerness."Death? but you have great obligations to fulfil to society,mademoiselle. Are you not the mother of the poor, to whom you giveclothes and wood in winter and work in summer? Your great fortune is aloan which you must return, and you have sacredly accepted it as such.To bury yourself in a convent would be selfishness; to remain an oldmaid is to fail in duty. In the first place, can you manage your vastproperty alone? May you not lose it? You will have law-suits, you willfind yourself surrounded by inextricable difficulties. Believe yourpastor: a husband is useful; you are bound to preserve what God hasbestowed upon you. I speak to you as a precious lamb of my flock. Youlove God too truly not to find your salvation in the midst of hisworld, of which you are noble ornament and to which you owe yourexample."

　　At this moment Madame des Grassins was announced. She came incited byvengeance and the sense of a great despair.

　　"Mademoiselle," she said--"Ah! here is monsieur le cure; I am silent.I came to speak to you on business; but I see that you are conferringwith--"

　　"Madame," said the cure, "I leave the field to you."

　　"Oh! monsieur le cure," said Eugenie, "come back later; your supportis very necessary to me just now."

　　"Ah, yes, indeed, my poor child!" said Madame des Grassins."What do you mean?" asked Eugenie and the cure together.

　　"Don't I know about your cousin's return, and his marriage withMademoiselle d'Aubrion? A woman doesn't carry her wits in her pocket."Eugenie blushed, and remained silent for a moment. From this day forthshe assumed the impassible countenance for which her father had beenso remarkable.

　　"Well, madame," she presently said, ironically, "no doubt I carry mywits in my pocket, for I do not understand you. Speak, say what youmean, before monsieur le cure; you know he is my director.""Well, then, mademoiselle, here is what des Grassins writes me. Readit."

　　Eugenie read the following letter:--

　　My dear Wife,--Charles Grandet has returned from the Indies and

　　has been in Paris about a month--

　　"A month!" thought Eugenie, her hand falling to her side. After apause she resumed the letter,--

　　I had to dance attendance before I was allowed to see the future

　　Vicomte d'Aubrion. Though all Paris is talking of his marriage and

　　the banns are published--

　　"He wrote to me after that!" thought Eugenie. She did not conclude thethought; she did not cry out, as a Parisian woman would have done,"The villain!" but though she said it not, contempt was none the lesspresent in her mind.

　　The marriage, however, will not come off. The Marquis d'Aubrion

　　will never give his daughter to the son of a bankrupt. I went to

　　tell Grandet of the steps his uncle and I took in his father's

　　business, and the clever manoeuvres by which we had managed to

　　keep the creditor's quiet until the present time. The insolent

　　fellow had the face to say to me--to me, who for five years have

　　devoted myself night and day to his interests and his honor!--that

　　/his father's affairs were not his/! A solicitor would have had

　　the right to demand fees amounting to thirty or forty thousand

　　francs, one per cent on the total of the debts. But patience!

　　there are twelve hundred thousand francs legitimately owing to the

　　creditors, and I shall at once declare his father a bankrupt.

　　I went into this business on the word of that old crocodile

　　Grandet, and I have made promises in the name of his family. If

　　Monsieur de vicomte d'Aubrion does not care for his honor, I care

　　for mine. I shall explain my position to the creditors. Still, I

　　have too much respect for Mademoiselle Eugenie (to whom under

　　happier circumstances we once hoped to be allied) to act in this

　　matter before you have spoken to her about it--

　　There Eugenie paused, and coldly returned the letter without finishingit.

　　"I thank you," she said to Madame des Grassins.

　　"Ah! you have the voice and manner of your deceased father," Madamedes Grassins replied.

　　"Madame, you have eight thousand francs to pay us," said Nanon,producing Charles's cheque.

　　"That's true; have the kindness to come with me now, MadameCornoiller."

　　"Monsieur le cure," said Eugenie with a noble composure, inspired bythe thought she was about to express, "would it be a sin to remain avirgin after marriage?"

　　"That is a case of conscience whose solution is not within myknowledge. If you wish to know what the celebrated Sanchez says of itin his treatise 'De Matrimonio,' I shall be able to tell youto-morrow."

　　The cure went away; Mademoiselle Grandet went up to her father'ssecret room and spent the day there alone, without coming down todinner, in spite of Nanon's entreaties. She appeared in the evening atthe hour when the usual company began to arrive. Never was the oldhall so full as on this occasion. The news of Charles's return and hisfoolish treachery had spread through the whole town. But howeverwatchful the curiosity of the visitors might be, it was leftunsatisfied. Eugenie, who expected scrutiny, allowed none of the cruelemotions that wrung her soul to appear on the calm surface of herface. She was able to show a smiling front in answer to all who triedto testify their interest by mournful looks or melancholy speeches.She hid her misery behind a veil of courtesy. Towards nine o'clock thegames ended and the players left the tables, paying their losses anddiscussing points of the game as they joined the rest of the company.At the moment when the whole party rose to take leave, an unexpectedand striking event occurred, which resounded through the length andbreadth of Saumur, from thence through the arrondissement, and even tothe four surrounding prefectures.

　　"Stay, monsieur le president," said Eugenie to Monsieur de Bonfons asshe saw him take his cane.

　　There was not a person in that numerous assembly who was unmoved bythese words. The president turned pale, and was forced to sit down."The president gets the millions," said Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt."It is plain enough; the president marries Mademoiselle Grandet,"cried Madame d'Orsonval.

　　"All the trumps in one hand," said the abbe.

　　"A love game," said the notary.

　　Each and all said his say, made his pun, and looked at the heiressmounted on her millions as on a pedestal. The drama begun nine yearsbefore had reached its conclusion. To tell the president, in face ofall Saumur, to "stay," was surely the same thing as proclaiming himher husband. In provincial towns social conventionalities are sorigidly enforced than an infraction like this constituted a solemnpromise.

　　"Monsieur le president," said Eugenie in a voice of some emotion whenthey were left alone, "I know what pleases you in me. Swear to leaveme free during my whole life, to claim none of the rights whichmarriage will give you over me, and my hand is yours. Oh!" she added,seeing him about to kneel at her feet, "I have more to say. I must notdeceive you. In my heart I cherish one inextinguishable feeling.Friendship is the only sentiment which I can give to a husband. I wishneither to affront him nor to violate the laws of my own heart. Butyou can possess my hand and my fortune only at the cost of doing me aninestimable service."

　　"I am ready for all things," said the president.

　　"Here are fifteen hundred thousand francs," she said, drawing from herbosom a certificate of a hundred shares in the Bank of France. "Go toParis,--not to-morrow, but instantly. Find Monsieur des Grassins,learn the names of my uncle's creditors, call them together, pay themin full all that was owing, with interest at five per cent from theday the debt was incurred to the present time. Be careful to obtain afull and legal receipt, in proper form, before a notary. You are amagistrate, and I can trust this matter in your hands. You are a manof honor; I will put faith in your word, and meet the dangers of lifeunder shelter of your name. Let us have mutual indulgence. We haveknown each other so long that we are almost related; you would notwish to render me unhappy."

　　The president fell at the feet of the rich heiress, his heart beatingand wrung with joy.

　　"I will be your slave!" he said.

　　"When you obtain the receipts, monsieur," she resumed, with a coldglance, "you will take them with all the other papers to my cousinGrandet, and you will give him this letter. On your return I will keepmy word."

　　The president understood perfectly that he owed the acquiescence ofMademoiselle Grandet to some bitterness of love, and he made haste toobey her orders, lest time should effect a reconciliation between thepair.

　　When Monsieur de Bonfons left her, Eugenie fell back in her chair andburst into tears. All was over.

　　The president took the mail-post, and reached Paris the next evening.The morning after his arrival he went to see des Grassins, andtogether they summoned the creditors to meet at the notary's officewhere the vouchers had been deposited. Not a single creditor failed tobe present. Creditors though they were, justice must be done to them,--they were all punctual. Monsieur de Bonfons, in the name ofMademoiselle Grandet, paid them the amount of their claims withinterest. The payment of interest was a remarkable event in theParisian commerce of that day. When the receipts were all legallyregistered, and des Grassins had received for his services the sum offifty thousand francs allowed to him by Eugenie, the president madehis way to the hotel d'Aubrion and found Charles just entering his ownapartment after a serious encounter with his prospective father-in-law. The old marquis had told him plainly that he should not marry hisdaughter until all the creditors of Guillaume Grandet had been paid infull.

　　The president gave Charles the following letter:--

　　My Cousin,--Monsieur le president de Bonfons has undertaken to

　　place in your hands the aquittance for all claims upon my uncle,

　　also a receipt by which I acknowledge having received from you the

　　sum total of those claims. I have heard of a possible failure, and

　　I think that the son of a bankrupt may not be able to marry

　　Mademoiselle d'Aubrion. Yes, my cousin, you judged rightly of my

　　mind and of my manners. I have, it is true, no part in the world;

　　I understand neither its calculations nor its customs; and I could

　　not give you the pleasures that you seek in it. Be happy,

　　according to the social conventions to which you have sacrificed

　　our love. To make your happiness complete I can only offer you

　　your father's honor. Adieu! You will always have a faithful friend

　　in your cousin

　　Eugenie.

　　The president smiled at the exclamation which the ambitious young mancould not repress as he received the documents.

　　"We shall announce our marriages at the same time," remarked Monsieurde Bonfons.

　　"Ah! you marry Eugenie? Well, I am delighted; she is a good girl.But," added Charles, struck with a luminous idea, "she must be rich?""She had," said the president, with a mischievous smile, "aboutnineteen millions four days ago; but she has only seventeen millionsto-day."

　　Charles looked at him thunderstruck.

　　"Seventeen mil--"

　　"Seventeen millions; yes, monsieur. We shall muster, MademoiselleGrandet and I, an income of seven hundred and fifty thousand francswhen we marry."

　　"My dear cousin," said Charles, recovering a little of his assurance,"we can push each other's fortunes."

　　"Agreed," said the president. "Here is also a little case which I amcharged to give into your own hands," he added, placing on the tablethe leather box which contained the dressing-case.

　　"Well, my dear friend," said Madame d'Aubrion, entering the roomwithout noticing the president, "don't pay any attention to what poorMonsieur d'Aubrion has just said to you; the Duchesse de Chaulieu hasturned his head. I repeat, nothing shall interfere with themarriage--"

　　"Very good, madame. The three millions which my father owed were paidyesterday."

　　"In money?" she asked.

　　"Yes, in full, capital and interest; and I am about to do honor to hismemory--"

　　"What folly!" exclaimed his mother-in-law. "Who is this?" shewhispered in Grandet's ear, perceiving the president.

　　"My man of business," he answered in a low voice.

　　The marquise bowed superciliously to Monsieur de Bonfons."We are pushing each other's fortunes already," said the president,taking up his hat. "Good-by, cousin."

　　"He is laughing at me, the old cockatoo! I'd like to put six inches ofiron into him!" muttered Charles.

　　The president was out of hearing. Three days later Monsieur deBonfons, on his return to Saumur, announced his marriage with Eugenie.Six months after the marriage he was appointed councillor in the Courroyale at Angers. Before leaving Saumur Madame de Bonfons had the goldof certain jewels, once so precious to her, melted up, and put,together with the eight thousand francs paid back by her cousin, intoa golden pyx, which she gave to the parish church where she had solong prayed for /him/. She now spent her time between Angers andSaumur. Her husband, who had shown some public spirit on a certainoccasion, became a judge in the superior courts, and finally, after afew years, president of them. He was anxiously awaiting a generalelection, in the hope of being returned to the Chamber of deputies. Hehankered after a peerage; and then--

　　"The king will be his cousin, won't he?" said Nanon, la Grande Nanon,Madame Cornoiller, bourgeoise of Saumur, as she listened to hermistress, who was recounting the honors to which she was called.Nevertheless, Monsieur de Bonfons (he had finally abolished hispatronymic of Cruchot) did not realize any of his ambitious ideas. Hedied eight days after his election as deputy of Saumur. God, who seesall and never strikes amiss, punished him, no doubt, for his sordidcalculations and the legal cleverness with which, /accurante Cruchot/,he had drawn up his marriage contract, in which husband and wife gaveto each other, "in case they should have no children, their entireproperty of every kind, landed or otherwise, without exception orreservation, dispensing even with the formality of an inventory;provided that said omission of said inventory shall not injure theirheirs and assigns, it being understood that this deed of gift is,etc., etc." This clause of the contract will explain the profoundrespect which monsieur le president always testified for the wishes,and above all, for the solitude of Madame de Bonfons. Women cited himas the most considerate and delicate of men, pitied him, and even wentso far as to find fault with the passion and grief of Eugenie, blamingher, as women know so well how to blame, with cruel but discreetinsinuation.

　　"Madame de Bonfons must be very ill to leave her husband entirelyalone. Poor woman! Is she likely to get well? What is it? Somethinggastric? A cancer?"--"She has grown perfectly yellow. She ought toconsult some celebrated doctor in Paris."--"How can she be happywithout a child? They say she loves her husband; then why not give himan heir?--in his position, too!"--"Do you know, it is really dreadful!If it is the result of mere caprice, it is unpardonable. Poorpresident!"

　　Endowed with the delicate perception which a solitary soul acquiresthrough constant meditation, through the exquisite clear-sightednesswith which a mind aloof from life fastens on all that falls within itssphere, Eugenie, taught by suffering and by her later education todivine thought, knew well that the president desired her death that hemight step into possession of their immense fortune, augmented by theproperty of his uncle the notary and his uncle the abbe, whom it hadlately pleased God to call to himself. The poor solitary pitied thepresident. Providence avenged her for the calculations and theindifference of a husband who respected the hopeless passion on whichshe spent her life because it was his surest safeguard. To give lifeto a child would give death to his hopes,--the hopes of selfishness,the joys of ambition, which the president cherished as he looked intothe future.

　　God thus flung piles of gold upon this prisoner to whom gold was amatter of indifference, who longed for heaven, who lived, pious andgood, in holy thoughts, succoring the unfortunate in secret, and neverwearying of such deeds. Madame de Bonfons became a widow at thirty-six. She is still beautiful, but with the beauty of a woman who isnearly forty years of age. Her face is white and placid and calm; hervoice gentle and self-possessed; her manners are simple. She has thenoblest qualities of sorrow, the saintliness of one who has neversoiled her soul by contact with the world; but she has also the rigidbearing of an old maid and the petty habits inseparable from thenarrow round of provincial life. In spite of her vast wealth, shelives as the poor Eugenie Grandet once lived. The fire is neverlighted on her hearth until the day when her father allowed it to belighted in the hall, and it is put out in conformity with the ruleswhich governed her youthful years. She dresses as her mother dressed.The house in Saumur, without sun, without warmth, always in shadow,melancholy, is an image of her life. She carefully accumulates herincome, and might seem parsimonious did she not disarm criticism by anoble employment of her wealth. Pious and charitable institutions, ahospital for old age, Christian schools for children, a public libraryrichly endowed, bear testimony against the charge of avarice whichsome persons lay at her door. The churches of Saumur owe much of theirembellishment to her. Madame de Bonfons (sometimes ironically spokenof as mademoiselle) inspires for the most part reverential respect:and yet that noble heart, beating only with tenderest emotions, hasbeen, from first to last, subjected to the calculations of humanselfishness; money has cast its frigid influence upon that hallowedlife and taught distrust of feelings to a woman who is all feeling."I have none but you to love me," she says to Nanon.

　　The hand of this woman stanches the secret wounds in many families.She goes on her way to heaven attended by a train of benefactions. Thegrandeur of her soul redeems the narrowness of her education and thepetty habits of her early life.

　　Such is the history of Eugenie Grandet, who is in the world but not ofit; who, created to be supremely a wife and mother, has neitherhusband nor children nor family. Lately there has been some questionof her marrying again. The Saumur people talk of her and of theMarquis de Froidfond, whose family are beginning to beset the richwidow just as, in former days, the Cruchots laid siege to the richheiress. Nanon and Cornoiller are, it is said, in the interests of themarquis. Nothing could be more false. Neither la Grande Nanon norCornoiller has sufficient mind to understand the corruptions of theworld.

End
On the morrow of this death Eugenie felt a new motive for attachmentto the house in which she was born, where she had suffered so much,where her mother had just died. She could not see the window and thechair on its castors without weeping. She thought she had mistaken theheart of her old father when she found herself the object of histenderest cares. He came in the morning and gave her his arm to takeher to breakfast; he looked at her for hours together with an eye thatwas almost kind; he brooded over her as though she had been gold. Theold man was so unlike himself, he trembled so often before hisdaughter, that Nanon and the Cruchotines, who witnessed his weakness,attributed it to his great age, and feared that his faculties weregiving away. But the day on which the family put on their mourning,and after dinner, to which meal Maitre Cruchot (the only person whoknew his secret) had been invited, the conduct of the old miser wasexplained.

　　"My dear child," he said to Eugenie when the table had been clearedand the doors carefully shut, "you are now your mother's heiress, andwe have a few little matters to settle between us. Isn't that so,Cruchot?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Is it necessary to talk of them to-day, father?"

　　"Yes, yes, little one; I can't bear the uncertainty in which I'mplaced. I think you don't want to give me pain?"

　　"Oh! father--"

　　"Well, then! let us settle it all to-night."

　　"What is it you wish me to do?"

　　"My little girl, it is not for me to say. Tell her, Cruchot.""Mademoiselle, your father does not wish to divide the property, norsell the estate, nor pay enormous taxes on the ready money which hemay possess. Therefore, to avoid all this, he must be released frommaking the inventory of his whole fortune, part of which you inheritfrom your mother, and which is now undivided between you and yourfather--"

　　"Cruchot, are you quite sure of what you are saying before you tell itto a mere child?"

　　"Let me tell it my own way, Grandet."

　　"Yes, yes, my friend. Neither you nor my daughter wish to rob me,--doyou, little one?"

　　"But, Monsieur Cruchot, what am I to do?" said Eugenie impatiently."Well," said the notary, "it is necessary to sign this deed, by whichyou renounce your rights to your mother's estate and leave your fatherthe use and disposition, during his lifetime, of all the propertyundivided between you, of which he guarantees you the capital.""I do not understand a word of what you are saying," returned Eugenie;"give me the deed, and show me where I am to sign it."

　　Pere Grandet looked alternately at the deed and at his daughter, athis daughter and at the deed, undergoing as he did so such violentemotion that he wiped the sweat from his brow.

　　"My little girl," he said, "if, instead of signing this deed, whichwill cost a great deal to record, you would simply agree to renounceyour rights as heir to your poor dear, deceased mother's property, andwould trust to me for the future, I should like it better. In thatcase I will pay you monthly the good round sum of a hundred francs.See, now, you could pay for as many masses as you want for anybody--Hein! a hundred francs a month--in /livres/?"

　　"I will do all you wish, father."

　　"Mademoiselle," said the notary, "it is my duty to point out to youthat you are despoiling yourself without guarantee--"

　　"Good heavens! what is all that to me?"

　　"Hold your tongue, Cruchot! It's settled, all settled," cried Grandet,taking his daughter's hand and striking it with his own. "Eugenie, youwon't go back on your word?--you are an honest girl, hein?""Oh! father!--"

　　He kissed her effusively, and pressed her in his arms till he almostchoked her.

　　"Go, my good child, you restore your father's life; but you onlyreturn to him that which he gave you: we are quits. This is howbusiness should be done. Life is a business. I bless you! you are avirtuous girl, and you love your father. Do just what you like infuture. To-morrow, Cruchot," he added, looking at the horrifiednotary, "you will see about preparing the deed of relinquishment, andthen enter it on the records of the court."

　　The next morning Eugenie signed the papers by which she herselfcompleted her spoliation. At the end of the first year, however, inspite of his bargain, the old man had not given his daughter one souof the hundred francs he had so solemnly pledged to her. When Eugeniepleasantly reminded him of this, he could not help coloring, and wenthastily to his secret hiding-place, from whence he brought down abouta third of the jewels he had taken from his nephew, and gave them toher.

　　"There, little one," he said in a sarcastic tone, "do you want thosefor your twelve hundred francs?"

　　"Oh! father, truly? will you really give them to me?"

　　"I'll give you as many more next year," he said, throwing them intoher apron. "So before long you'll get all his gewgaws," he added,rubbing his hands, delighted to be able to speculate on his daughter'sfeelings.

　　Nevertheless, the old man, though still robust, felt the importance ofinitiating his daughter into the secrets of his thrift and itsmanagement. For two consecutive years he made her order the householdmeals in his presence and receive the rents, and he taught her slowlyand successively the names and remunerative capacity of his vineyardsand his farms. About the third year he had so thoroughly accustomedher to his avaricious methods that they had turned into the settledhabits of her own life, and he was able to leave the household keys inher charge without anxiety, and to install her as mistress of thehouse.

　　*****

　　Five years passed away without a single event to relieve themonotonous existence of Eugenie and her father. The same actions wereperformed daily with the automatic regularity of clockwork. The deepsadness of Mademoiselle Grandet was known to every one; but if otherssurmised the cause, she herself never uttered a word that justifiedthe suspicions which all Saumur entertained about the state of therich heiress's heart. Her only society was made up of the threeCruchots and a few of their particular friends whom they had, littleby little, introduced into the Grandet household. They had taught herto play whist, and they came every night for their game. During theyear 1827 her father, feeling the weight of his infirmities, wasobliged to initiate her still further into the secrets of his landedproperty, and told her that in case of difficulty she was to haverecourse to Maitre Cruchot, whose integrity was well known to him.Towards the end of this year the old man, then eighty-two, was seizedby paralysis, which made rapid progress. Dr. Bergerin gave him up.Eugenie, feeling that she was about to be left alone in the world,came, as it were, nearer to her father, and clasped more tightly thislast living link of affection. To her mind, as in that of all lovingwomen, love was the whole of life. Charles was not there, and shedevoted all her care and attention to the old father, whose facultieshad begun to weaken, though his avarice remained instinctively acute.The death of this man offered no contrast to his life. In the morninghe made them roll him to a spot between the chimney of his chamber andthe door of the secret room, which was filled, no doubt, with gold. Heasked for an explanation of every noise he heard, even the slightest;to the great astonishment of the notary, he even heard the watch-dogyawning in the court-yard. He woke up from his apparent stupor at theday and hour when the rents were due, or when accounts had to besettled with his vine-dressers, and receipts given. At such times heworked his chair forward on its castors until he faced the door of theinner room. He made his daughter open it, and watched while she placedthe bags of money one upon another in his secret receptacles andrelocked the door. Then she returned silently to her seat, aftergiving him the key, which he replaced in his waistcoat pocket andfingered from time to time. His old friend the notary, feeling surethat the rich heiress would inevitably marry his nephew the president,if Charles Grandet did not return, redoubled all his attentions; hecame every day to take Grandet's orders, went on his errands toFroidfond, to the farms and the fields and the vineyards, sold thevintages, and turned everything into gold and silver, which foundtheir way in sacks to the secret hiding-place.

　　At length the last struggle came, in which the strong frame of the oldman slowly yielded to destruction. He was determined to sit at thechimney-corner facing the door of the secret room. He drew off androlled up all the coverings which were laid over him, saying to Nanon,"Put them away, lock them up, for fear they should be stolen."So long as he could open his eyes, in which his whole being had nowtaken refuge, he turned them to the door behind which lay histreasures, saying to his daughter, "Are they there? are they there?"in a tone of voice which revealed a sort of panic fear.

　　"Yes, my father," she would answer.

　　"Take care of the gold--put gold before me."

　　Eugenie would then spread coins on a table before him, and he wouldsit for hours together with his eyes fixed upon them, like a childwho, at the moment it first begins to see, gazes in stupidcontemplation at the same object, and like the child, a distressfulsmile would flicker upon his face.

　　"It warms me!" he would sometimes say, as an expression of beatitudestole across his features.

　　When the cure of the parish came to administer the last sacraments,the old man's eyes, sightless, apparently, for some hours, kindled atthe sight of the cross, the candlesticks, and the holy-water vessel ofsilver; he gazed at them fixedly, and his wen moved for the last time.When the priest put the crucifix of silver-gilt to his lips, that hemight kiss the Christ, he made a frightful gesture, as if to seize it;and that last effort cost him his life. He called Eugenie, whom he didnot see, though she was kneeling beside him bathing with tears hisstiffening hand, which was already cold.

　　"My father, bless me!" she entreated.

　　"Take care of it all. You will render me an account yonder!" he said,proving by these last words that Christianity must always be thereligion of misers.

　　*****

　　Eugenie Grandet was now alone in the world in that gray house, withnone but Nanon to whom she could turn with the certainty of beingheard and understood,--Nanon the sole being who loved her for herselfand with whom she could speak of her sorrows. La Grande Nanon was aprovidence for Eugenie. She was not a servant, but a humble friend.After her father's death Eugenie learned from Maitre Cruchot that shepossessed an income of three hundred thousand francs from landed andpersonal property in the arrondissement of Saumur; also six millionsinvested at three per cent in the Funds (bought at sixty, and nowworth seventy-six francs); also two millions in gold coin, and ahundred thousand francs in silver crown-pieces, besides all theinterest which was still to be collected. The sum total of herproperty reached seventeen millions.

　　"Where is my cousin?" was her one thought.

　　The day on which Maitre Cruchot handed in to his client a clear andexact schedule of the whole inheritance, Eugenie remained alone withNanon, sitting beside the fireplace in the vacant hall, where all wasnow a memory, from the chair on castors which her mother had sat in,to the glass from which her cousin drank.

　　"Nanon, we are alone--"

　　"Yes, mademoiselle; and if I knew where he was, the darling, I'd go onfoot to find him."

　　"The ocean is between us," she said.

　　While the poor heiress wept in company of an old servant, in that colddark house, which was to her the universe, the whole province rang,from Nantes to Orleans, with the seventeen millions of MademoiselleGrandet. Among her first acts she had settled an annuity of twelvehundred francs on Nanon, who, already possessed of six hundred more,became a rich and enviable match. In less than a month that good soulpassed from single to wedded life under the protection of AntoineCornoiller, who was appointed keeper of all Mademoiselle Grandet'sestates. Madame Cornoiller possessed one striking advantage over hercontemporaries. Although she was fifty-nine years of age, she did notlook more than forty. Her strong features had resisted the ravages oftime. Thanks to the healthy customs of her semi-conventual life, shelaughed at old age from the vantage-ground of a rosy skin and an ironconstitution. Perhaps she never looked as well in her life as she didon her marriage-day. She had all the benefits of her ugliness, and wasbig and fat and strong, with a look of happiness on her indestructiblefeatures which made a good many people envy Cornoiller.

　　"Fast colors!" said the draper.

　　"Quite likely to have children," said the salt merchant. "She'spickled in brine, saving your presence."

　　"She is rich, and that fellow Cornoiller has done a good thing forhimself," said a third man.

　　When she came forth from the old house on her way to the parishchurch, Nanon, who was loved by all the neighborhood, received manycompliments as she walked down the tortuous street. Eugenie had givenher three dozen silver forks and spoons as a wedding present.Cornoiller, amazed at such magnificence, spoke of his mistress withtears in his eyes; he would willingly have been hacked in pieces inher behalf. Madame Cornoiller, appointed housekeeper to MademoiselleGrandet, got as much happiness out of her new position as she did fromthe possession of a husband. She took charge of the weekly accounts;she locked up the provisions and gave them out daily, after the mannerof her defunct master; she ruled over two servants,--a cook, and amaid whose business it was to mend the house-linen and makemademoiselle's dresses. Cornoiller combined the functions of keeperand bailiff. It is unnecessary to say that the women-servants selectedby Nanon were "perfect treasures." Mademoiselle Grandet thus had fourservants, whose devotion was unbounded. The farmers perceived nochange after Monsieur Grandet's death; the usages and customs he hadsternly established were scrupulously carried out by Monsieur andMadame Cornoiller.

　　At thirty years of age Eugenie knew none of the joys of life. Herpale, sad childhood had glided on beside a mother whose heart, alwaysmisunderstood and wounded, had known only suffering. Leaving this lifejoyfully, the mother pitied the daughter because she still must live;and she left in her child's soul some fugitive remorse and manylasting regrets. Eugenie's first and only love was a wellspring ofsadness within her. Meeting her lover for a few brief days, she hadgiven him her heart between two kisses furtively exchanged; then hehad left her, and a whole world lay between them. This love, cursed byher father, had cost the life of her mother and brought her onlysorrow, mingled with a few frail hopes. Thus her upward spring towardshappiness had wasted her strength and given her nothing in exchangefor it. In the life of the soul, as in the physical life, there is aninspiration and a respiration; the soul needs to absorb the sentimentsof another soul and assimilate them, that it may render them backenriched. Were it not for this glorious human phenomenon, there wouldbe no life for the heart; air would be wanting; it would suffer, andthen perish. Eugenie had begun to suffer. For her, wealth was neithera power nor a consolation; she could not live except through love,through religion, through faith in the future. Love explained to herthe mysteries of eternity. Her heart and the Gospel taught her to knowtwo worlds; she bathed, night and day, in the depths of two infinitethoughts, which for her may have had but one meaning. She drew backwithin herself, loving, and believing herself beloved. For seven yearsher passion had invaded everything. Her treasuries were not themillions whose revenues were rolling up; they were Charles's dressing-case, the portraits hanging above her bed, the jewels recovered fromher father and proudly spread upon a bed of wool in a drawer of theoaken cabinet, the thimble of her aunt, used for a while by hermother, which she wore religiously as she worked at a piece ofembroidery,--a Penelope's web, begun for the sole purpose of puttingupon her finger that gold so rich in memories.

　　It seemed unlikely that Mademoiselle Grandet would marry during theperiod of her mourning. Her genuine piety was well known. Consequentlythe Cruchots, whose policy was sagely guided by the old abbe,contented themselves for the time being with surrounding the greatheiress and paying her the most affectionate attentions. Every eveningthe hall was filled with a party of devoted Cruchotines, who sang thepraises of its mistress in every key. She had her doctor in ordinary,her grand almoner, her chamberlain, her first lady of honor, her primeminister; above all, her chancellor, a chancellor who would fain havesaid much to her. If the heiress had wished for a train-bearer, onewould instantly have been found. She was a queen, obsequiouslyflattered. Flattery never emanates from noble souls; it is the gift oflittle minds, who thus still further belittle themselves to worm theirway into the vital being of the persons around whom they crawl.Flattery means self-interest. So the people who, night after night,assembled in Mademoiselle Grandet's house (they called herMademoiselle de Froidfond) outdid each other in expressions ofadmiration. This concert of praise, never before bestowed uponEugenie, made her blush under its novelty; but insensibly her earbecame habituated to the sound, and however coarse the complimentsmight be, she soon was so accustomed to hear her beauty lauded that ifany new-comer had seemed to think her plain, she would have felt thereproach far more than she might have done eight years earlier. Sheended at last by loving the incense, which she secretly laid at thefeet of her idol. By degrees she grew accustomed to be treated as asovereign and to see her court pressing around her every evening.Monsieur de Bonfons was the hero of the little circle, where his wit,his person, his education, his amiability, were perpetually praised.One or another would remark that in seven years he had largelyincreased his fortune, that Bonfons brought in at least ten thousandfrancs a year, and was surrounded, like the other possessions of theCruchots, by the vast domains of the heiress.

　　"Do you know, mademoiselle," said an habitual visitor, "that theCruchots have an income of forty thousand francs among them!""And then, their savings!" exclaimed an elderly female Cruchotine,Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt.

　　"A gentleman from Paris has lately offered Monsieur Cruchot twohundred thousand francs for his practice," said another. "He will sellit if he is appointed /juge de paix/."

　　"He wants to succeed Monsieur de Bonfons as president of the Civilcourts, and is taking measures," replied Madame d'Orsonval. "Monsieurle president will certainly be made councillor."

　　"Yes, he is a very distinguished man," said another,--"don't you thinkso, mademoiselle?"

　　Monsieur de Bonfons endeavored to put himself in keeping with the rolehe sought to play. In spite of his forty years, in spite of his duskyand crabbed features, withered like most judicial faces, he dressed inyouthful fashions, toyed with a bamboo cane, never took snuff inMademoiselle de Froidfond's house, and came in a white cravat and ashirt whose pleated frill gave him a family resemblance to the race ofturkeys. He addressed the beautiful heiress familiarly, and spoke ofher as "Our dear Eugenie." In short, except for the number ofvisitors, the change from loto to whist, and the disappearance ofMonsieur and Madame Grandet, the scene was about the same as the onewith which this history opened. The pack were still pursuing Eugenieand her millions; but the hounds, more in number, lay better on thescent, and beset the prey more unitedly. If Charles could have droppedfrom the Indian Isles, he would have found the same people and thesame interests. Madame des Grassins, to whom Eugenie was full ofkindness and courtesy, still persisted in tormenting the Cruchots.Eugenie, as in former days, was the central figure of the picture; andCharles, as heretofore, would still have been the sovereign of all.Yet there had been some progress. The flowers which the presidentformerly presented to Eugenie on her birthdays and fete-days had nowbecome a daily institution. Every evening he brought the rich heiressa huge and magnificent bouquet, which Madame Cornoiller placedconspicuously in a vase, and secretly threw into a corner of thecourt-yard when the visitors had departed.

　　Early in the spring, Madame des Grassins attempted to trouble thepeace of the Cruchotines by talking to Eugenie of the Marquis deFroidfond, whose ancient and ruined family might be restored if theheiress would give him back his estates through marriage. Madame desGrassins rang the changes on the peerage and the title of marquise,until, mistaking Eugenie's disdainful smile for acquiescence, she wentabout proclaiming that the marriage with "Monsieur Cruchot" was notnearly as certain as people thought.

　　"Though Monsieur de Froidfond is fifty," she said, "he does not lookolder than Monsieur Cruchot. He is a widower, and he has children,that's true. But then he is a marquis; he will be peer of France; andin times like these where you will find a better match? I know it fora fact that Pere Grandet, when he put all his money into Froidfond,intended to graft himself upon that stock; he often told me so. He wasa deep one, that old man!"

　　"Ah! Nanon," said Eugenie, one night as she was going to bed, "how isit that in seven years he has never once written to me?"

　　XIII

　　While these events were happening in Saumur, Charles was making hisfortune in the Indies. His commercial outfit had sold well. He beganby realizing a sum of six thousand dollars. Crossing the line hadbrushed a good many cobwebs out of his brain; he perceived that thebest means of attaining fortune in tropical regions, as well as inEurope, was to buy and sell men. He went to the coast of Africa andbought Negroes, combining his traffic in human flesh with that ofother merchandise equally advantageous to his interests. He carriedinto this business an activity which left him not a moment of leisure.He was governed by the desire of reappearing in Paris with all theprestige of a large fortune, and by the hope of regaining a positioneven more brilliant than the one from which he had fallen.By dint of jostling with men, travelling through many lands, andstudying a variety of conflicting customs, his ideas had been modifiedand had become sceptical. He ceased to have fixed principles of rightand wrong, for he saw what was called a crime in one country lauded asa virtue in another. In the perpetual struggle of selfish interestshis heart grew cold, then contracted, and then dried up. The blood ofthe Grandets did not fail of its destiny; Charles became hard, andeager for prey. He sold Chinamen, Negroes, birds' nests, children,artists; he practised usury on a large scale; the habit of defraudingcustom-houses soon made him less scrupulous about the rights of hisfellow men. He went to the Island of St. Thomas and bought, for a meresong, merchandise that had been captured by pirates, and took it toports where he could sell it at a good price. If the pure and nobleface of Eugenie went with him on his first voyage, like that image ofthe Virgin which Spanish mariners fastened to their masts, if heattributed his first success to the magic influence of the prayers andintercessions of his gentle love, later on women of other kinds,--blacks, mulattoes, whites, and Indian dancing-girls,--orgies andadventures in many lands, completely effaced all recollection of hiscousin, of Saumur, of the house, the bench, the kiss snatched in thedark passage. He remembered only the little garden shut in withcrumbling walls, for it was there he learned the fate that hadovertaken him; but he rejected all connection with his family. Hisuncle was an old dog who had filched his jewels; Eugenie had no placein his heart nor in his thoughts, though she did have a place in hisaccounts as a creditor for the sum of six thousand francs.Such conduct and such ideas explain Charles Grandet's silence. In theIndies, at St. Thomas, on the coast of Africa, at Lisbon, and in theUnited States the adventurer had taken the pseudonym of Shepherd, thathe might not compromise his own name. Charles Shepherd could safely beindefatigable, bold, grasping, and greedy of gain, like a man whoresolves to snatch his fortune /quibus cumque viis/, and makes hasteto have done with villany, that he may spend the rest of his life asan honest man.

　　With such methods, prosperity was rapid and brilliant; and in 1827Charles Grandet returned to Bordeaux on the "Marie Caroline," a finebrig belonging to a royalist house of business. He brought with himnineteen hundred thousand francs worth of gold-dust, from which heexpected to derive seven or eight per cent more at the Paris mint. Onthe brig he met a gentleman-in-ordinary to His Majesty Charles X.,Monsieur d'Aubrion, a worthy old man who had committed the folly ofmarrying a woman of fashion with a fortune derived from the West IndiaIslands. To meet the costs of Madame d'Aubrion's extravagance, he hadgone out to the Indies to sell the property, and was now returningwith his family to France.

　　Monsieur and Madame d'Aubrion, of the house of d'Aubrion de Buch, afamily of southern France, whose last /captal/, or chief, died before1789, were now reduced to an income of about twenty thousand francs,and they possessed an ugly daughter whom the mother was resolved tomarry without a /dot/,--the family fortune being scarcely sufficientfor the demands of her own life in Paris. This was an enterprise whosesuccess might have seemed problematical to most men of the world, inspite of the cleverness with which such men credit a fashionablewoman; in fact, Madame d'Aubrion herself, when she looked at herdaughter, almost despaired of getting rid of her to any one, even to aman craving connection with nobility. Mademoiselle d'Aubrion was along, spare, spindling demoiselle, like her namesake the insect; hermouth was disdainful; over it hung a nose that was too long, thick atthe end, sallow in its normal condition, but very red after a meal,--asort of vegetable phenomenon which is particularly disagreeable whenit appears in the middle of a pale, dull, and uninteresting face. Inone sense she was all that a worldly mother, thirty-eight years of ageand still a beauty with claims to admiration, could have wished.However, to counterbalance her personal defects, the marquise gave herdaughter a distinguished air, subjected her to hygienic treatmentwhich provisionally kept her nose at a reasonable flesh-tint, taughther the art of dressing well, endowed her with charming manners,showed her the trick of melancholy glances which interest a man andmake him believe that he has found a long-sought angel, taught her themanoeuvre of the foot,--letting it peep beneath the petticoat, to showits tiny size, at the moment when the nose became aggressively red; inshort, Madame d'Aubrion had cleverly made the very best of heroffspring. By means of full sleeves, deceptive pads, puffed dressesamply trimmed, and high-pressure corsets, she had obtained suchcurious feminine developments that she ought, for the instruction ofmothers, to have exhibited them in a museum.

　　Charles became very intimate with Madame d'Aubrion precisely becauseshe was desirous of becoming intimate with him. Persons who were onboard the brig declared that the handsome Madame d'Aubrion neglectedno means of capturing so rich a son-in-law. On landing at Bordeaux inJune, 1827, Monsieur, Madame, Mademoiselle d'Aubrion, and Charleslodged at the same hotel and started together for Paris. The hoteld'Aubrion was hampered with mortgages; Charles was destined to freeit. The mother told him how delighted she would be to give up theground-floor to a son-in-law. Not sharing Monsieur d'Aubrion'sprejudices on the score of nobility, she promised Charles Grandet toobtain a royal ordinance from Charles X. which would authorize him,Grandet, to take the name and arms of d'Aubrion and to succeed, bypurchasing the entailed estate for thirty-six thousand francs a year,to the titles of Captal de Buch and Marquis d'Aubrion. By thus unitingtheir fortunes, living on good terms, and profiting by sinecures, thetwo families might occupy the hotel d'Aubrion with an income of over ahundred thousand francs.

　　"And when a man has a hundred thousand francs a year, a name, afamily, and a position at court,--for I will get you appointed asgentleman-of-the-bedchamber,--he can do what he likes," she said toCharles. "You can then become anything you choose,--master of therolls in the council of State, prefect, secretary to an embassy, theambassador himself, if you like. Charles X. is fond of d'Aubrion; theyhave known each other from childhood."

　　Intoxicated with ambition, Charles toyed with the hopes thus cleverlypresented to him in the guise of confidences poured from heart toheart. Believing his father's affairs to have been settled by hisuncle, he imagined himself suddenly anchored in the Faubourg Saint-Germain,--that social object of all desire, where, under shelter ofMademoiselle Mathilde's purple nose, he was to reappear as the Comted'Aubrion, very much as the Dreux reappeared in Breze. Dazzled by theprosperity of the Restoration, which was tottering when he leftFrance, fascinated by the splendor of aristocratic ideas, hisintoxication, which began on the brig, increased after he reachedParis, and he finally determined to take the course and reach the highposition which the selfish hopes of his would-be mother-in-law pointedout to him. His cousin counted for no more than a speck in thisbrilliant perspective; but he went to see Annette. True woman of theworld, Annette advised her old friend to make the marriage, andpromised him her support in all his ambitious projects. In her heartshe was enchanted to fasten an ugly and uninteresting girl on Charles,whose life in the West Indies had rendered him very attractive. Hiscomplexion had bronzed, his manners had grown decided and bold, likethose of a man accustomed to make sharp decisions, to rule, and tosucceed. Charles breathed more at his ease in Paris, conscious that henow had a part to play.

　　Des Grassins, hearing of his return, of his approaching marriage andhis large fortune, came to see him, and inquired about the threehundred thousand francs still required to settle his father's debts.He found Grandet in conference with a goldsmith, from whom he hadordered jewels for Mademoiselle d'Aubrion's /corbeille/, and who wasthen submitting the designs. Charles had brought back magnificentdiamonds, and the value of their setting, together with the plate andjewelry of the new establishment, amounted to more than two hundredthousand francs. He received des Grassins, whom he did not recognize,with the impertinence of a young man of fashion conscious of havingkilled four men in as many duels in the Indies. Monsieur des Grassinshad already called several times. Charles listened to him coldly, andthen replied, without fully understanding what had been said to him,--"My father's affairs are not mine. I am much obliged, monsieur, forthe trouble you have been good enough to take,--by which, however, Ireally cannot profit. I have not earned two millions by the sweat ofmy brow to fling them at the head of my father's creditors.""But suppose that your father's estate were within a few days to bedeclared bankrupt?"

　　"Monsieur, in a few days I shall be called the Comte d'Aubrion; youwill understand, therefore, that what you threaten is of noconsequence to me. Besides, you know as well as I do that when a manhas an income of a hundred thousand francs his father has /neverfailed/." So saying, he politely edged Monsieur des Grassins to thedoor.

　　*****

　　At the beginning of August in the same year, Eugenie was sitting onthe little wooden bench where her cousin had sworn to love hereternally, and where she usually breakfasted if the weather were fine.The poor girl was happy, for the moment, in the fresh and joyoussummer air, letting her memory recall the great and the little eventsof her love and the catastrophes which had followed it. The sun hadjust reached the angle of the ruined wall, so full of chinks, which noone, through a caprice of the mistress, was allowed to touch, thoughCornoiller often remarked to his wife that "it would fall and crushsomebody one of these days." At this moment the postman knocked, andgave a letter to Madame Cornoiller, who ran into the garden, cryingout:

　　"Mademoiselle, a letter!" She gave it to her mistress, adding, "Is itthe one you expected?"

　　The words rang as loudly in the heart of Eugenie as they echoed insound from wall to wall of the court and garden.

　　"Paris--from him--he has returned!"

　　Eugenie turned pale and held the letter for a moment. She trembled soviolently that she could not break the seal. La Grande Nanon stoodbefore her, both hands on her hips, her joy puffing as it were likesmoke through the cracks of her brown face.

　　"Read it, mademoiselle!"

　　"Ah, Nanon, why did he return to Paris? He went from Saumur.""Read it, and you'll find out."

　　Eugenie opened the letter with trembling fingers. A cheque on thehouse of "Madame des Grassins and Coret, of Saumur," fluttered down.Nanon picked it up.

　　My dear Cousin,--

　　"No longer 'Eugenie,'" she thought, and her heart quailed.

　　You--

　　"He once said 'thou.'" She folded her arms and dared not read anotherword; great tears gathered in her eyes.

　　"Is he dead?" asked Nanon.

　　"If he were, he could not write," said Eugenie.

　　She then read the whole letter, which was as follows:

　　My dear Cousin,--You will, I am sure, hear with pleasure of the

　　success of my enterprise. You brought me luck; I have come back

　　rich, and I have followed the advice of my uncle, whose death,

　　together with that of my aunt, I have just learned from Monsieur

　　des Grassins. The death of parents is in the course of nature, and

　　we must succeed them. I trust you are by this time consoled.

　　Nothing can resist time, as I am well aware. Yes, my dear cousin,

　　the day of illusions is, unfortunately, gone for me. How could it

　　be otherwise? Travelling through many lands, I have reflected upon

　　life. I was a child when I went away,--I have come back a man.

　　To-day, I think of many I did not dream of then. You are free, my

　　dear cousin, and I am free still. Nothing apparently hinders the

　　realization of our early hopes; but my nature is too loyal to hide

　　from you the situation in which I find myself. I have not

　　forgotten our relations; I have always remembered, throughout my

　　long wanderings, the little wooden seat--

　　Eugenie rose as if she were sitting on live coals, and went away andsat down on the stone steps of the court.

　　--the little wooden seat where we vowed to love each other

　　forever, the passage, the gray hall, my attic chamber, and the

　　night when, by your delicate kindness, you made my future easier

　　to me. Yes, these recollections sustained my courage; I said in my

　　heart that you were thinking of me at the hour we had agreed upon.

　　Have you always looked at the clouds at nine o'clock? Yes, I am

　　sure of it. I cannot betray so true a friendship,--no, I must not

　　deceive you. An alliance has been proposed to me which satisfies

　　all my ideas of matrimony. Love in marriage is a delusion. My

　　present experience warns me that in marrying we are bound to obey

　　all social laws and meet the conventional demands of the world.

　　Now, between you and me there are differences which might affect

　　your future, my dear cousin, even more than they would mine. I

　　will not here speak of your customs and inclinations, your

　　education, nor yet of your habits, none of which are in keeping

　　with Parisian life, or with the future which I have marked out for

　　myself. My intention is to keep my household on a stately footing,

　　to receive much company,--in short, to live in the world; and I

　　think I remember that you love a quiet and tranquil life. I will

　　be frank, and make you the judge of my situation; you have the

　　right to understand it and to judge it.

　　I possess at the present moment an income of eighty thousand

　　francs. This fortune enables me to marry into the family of

　　Aubrion, whose heiress, a young girl nineteen years of age, brings

　　me a title, a place of gentleman-of-the-bed-chamber to His

　　Majesty, and a very brilliant position. I will admit to you, my

　　dear cousin, that I do not love Mademoiselle d'Aubrion; but in

　　marrying her I secure to my children a social rank whose

　　advantages will one day be incalculable: monarchical principles

　　are daily coming more and more into favor. Thus in course of time

　　my son, when he becomes Marquis d'Aubrion, having, as he then will

　　have, an entailed estate with a rental of forty thousand francs a

　　year, can obtain any position in the State which he may think

　　proper to select. We owe ourselves to our children.

　　You see, my cousin, with what good faith I lay the state of my

　　heart, my hopes, and my fortune before you. Possibly, after seven

　　years' separation, you have yourself forgotten our youthful loves;

　　but I have never forgotten either your kindness or my own words. I

　　remember all, even words that were lightly uttered,--words by

　　which a man less conscientious than I, with a heart less youthful

　　and less upright, would scarcely feel himself bound. In telling

　　you that the marriage I propose to make is solely one of

　　convenience, that I still remember our childish love, am I not

　　putting myself entirely in your hands and making you the mistress

　　of my fate? am I not telling you that if I must renounce my social

　　ambitions, I shall willingly content myself with the pure and

　　simple happiness of which you have shown me so sweet an image?"Tan, ta, ta--tan, ta, ti," sang Charles Grandet to the air of /Nonpiu andrai/, as he signed himself,--

　　Your devoted cousin,

　　Charles.

　　"Thunder! that's doing it handsomely!" he said, as he looked about himfor the cheque; having found it, he added the words:--

　　P.S.--I enclose a cheque on the des Grassins bank for eight

　　thousand francs to your order, payable in gold, which includes the

　　capital and interest of the sum you were kind enough to lend me. I

　　am expecting a case from Bordeaux which contains a few things

　　which you must allow me to offer you as a mark of my unceasing

　　gratitude. You can send my dressing-case by the diligence to the

　　hotel d'Aubrion, rue Hillerin-Bertin.

　　"By the diligence!" said Eugenie. "A thing for which I would have laiddown my life!"

　　Terrible and utter disaster! The ship went down, leaving not a spar,not a plank, on a vast ocean of hope! Some women when they seethemselves abandoned will try to tear their lover from the arms of arival, they will kill her, and rush to the ends of the earth,--to thescaffold, to their tomb. That, no doubt, is fine; the motive of thecrime is a great passion, which awes even human justice. Other womenbow their heads and suffer in silence; they go their way dying,resigned, weeping, forgiving, praying, and recollecting, till theydraw their last breath. This is love,--true love, the love of angels,the proud love which lives upon its anguish and dies of it. Such wasEugenie's love after she had read that dreadful letter. She raised hereyes to heaven, thinking of the last words uttered by her dyingmother, who, with the prescience of death, had looked into the futurewith clear and penetrating eyes: Eugenie, remembering that propheticdeath, that prophetic life, measured with one glance her own destiny.Nothing was left for her; she could only unfold her wings, stretchupward to the skies, and live in prayer until the day of herdeliverance.

　　"My mother was right," she said, weeping. "Suffer--and die!"XIV

　　Eugenie came slowly back from the garden to the house, and avoidedpassing, as was her custom, through the corridor. But the memory ofher cousin was in the gray old hall and on the chimney-piece, wherestood a certain saucer and the old Sevres sugar-bowl which she usedevery morning at her breakfast.

　　This day was destined to be solemn throughout and full of events.Nanon announced the cure of the parish church. He was related to theCruchots, and therefore in the interests of Monsieur de Bonfons. Forsome time past the old abbe had urged him to speak to MademoiselleGrandet, from a purely religious point of view, about the duty ofmarriage for a woman in her position. When she saw her pastor, Eugeniesupposed he had come for the thousand francs which she gave monthly tothe poor, and she told Nanon to go and fetch them; but the cure onlysmiled.

　　"To-day, mademoiselle," he said, "I have come to speak to you about apoor girl in whom the whole town of Saumur takes an interest, who,through lack of charity to herself, neglects her Christian duties.""Monsieur le cure, you have come to me at a moment when I cannot thinkof my neighbor, I am filled with thoughts of myself. I am veryunhappy; my only refuge is in the Church; her bosom is large enough tohold all human woe, her love so full that we may draw from its depthsand never drain it dry."

　　"Mademoiselle, in speaking of this young girl we shall speak of you.Listen! If you wish to insure your salvation you have only two pathsto take,--either leave the world or obey its laws. Obey either yourearthly destiny or your heavenly destiny."

　　"Ah! your voice speaks to me when I need to hear a voice. Yes, God hassent you to me; I will bid farewell to the world and live for Godalone, in silence and seclusion."

　　"My daughter, you must think long before you take so violent a step.Marriage is life, the veil is death."

　　"Yes, death,--a quick death!" she said, with dreadful eagerness."Death? but you have great obligations to fulfil to society,mademoiselle. Are you not the mother of the poor, to whom you giveclothes and wood in winter and work in summer? Your great fortune is aloan which you must return, and you have sacredly accepted it as such.To bury yourself in a convent would be selfishness; to remain an oldmaid is to fail in duty. In the first place, can you manage your vastproperty alone? May you not lose it? You will have law-suits, you willfind yourself surrounded by inextricable difficulties. Believe yourpastor: a husband is useful; you are bound to preserve what God hasbestowed upon you. I speak to you as a precious lamb of my flock. Youlove God too truly not to find your salvation in the midst of hisworld, of which you are noble ornament and to which you owe yourexample."

　　At this moment Madame des Grassins was announced. She came incited byvengeance and the sense of a great despair.

　　"Mademoiselle," she said--"Ah! here is monsieur le cure; I am silent.I came to speak to you on business; but I see that you are conferringwith--"

　　"Madame," said the cure, "I leave the field to you."

　　"Oh! monsieur le cure," said Eugenie, "come back later; your supportis very necessary to me just now."

　　"Ah, yes, indeed, my poor child!" said Madame des Grassins."What do you mean?" asked Eugenie and the cure together.

　　"Don't I know about your cousin's return, and his marriage withMademoiselle d'Aubrion? A woman doesn't carry her wits in her pocket."Eugenie blushed, and remained silent for a moment. From this day forthshe assumed the impassible countenance for which her father had beenso remarkable.

　　"Well, madame," she presently said, ironically, "no doubt I carry mywits in my pocket, for I do not understand you. Speak, say what youmean, before monsieur le cure; you know he is my director.""Well, then, mademoiselle, here is what des Grassins writes me. Readit."

　　Eugenie read the following letter:--

　　My dear Wife,--Charles Grandet has returned from the Indies and

　　has been in Paris about a month--

　　"A month!" thought Eugenie, her hand falling to her side. After apause she resumed the letter,--

　　I had to dance attendance before I was allowed to see the future

　　Vicomte d'Aubrion. Though all Paris is talking of his marriage and

　　the banns are published--

　　"He wrote to me after that!" thought Eugenie. She did not conclude thethought; she did not cry out, as a Parisian woman would have done,"The villain!" but though she said it not, contempt was none the lesspresent in her mind.

　　The marriage, however, will not come off. The Marquis d'Aubrion

　　will never give his daughter to the son of a bankrupt. I went to

　　tell Grandet of the steps his uncle and I took in his father's

　　business, and the clever manoeuvres by which we had managed to

　　keep the creditor's quiet until the present time. The insolent

　　fellow had the face to say to me--to me, who for five years have

　　devoted myself night and day to his interests and his honor!--that

　　/his father's affairs were not his/! A solicitor would have had

　　the right to demand fees amounting to thirty or forty thousand

　　francs, one per cent on the total of the debts. But patience!

　　there are twelve hundred thousand francs legitimately owing to the

　　creditors, and I shall at once declare his father a bankrupt.

　　I went into this business on the word of that old crocodile

　　Grandet, and I have made promises in the name of his family. If

　　Monsieur de vicomte d'Aubrion does not care for his honor, I care

　　for mine. I shall explain my position to the creditors. Still, I

　　have too much respect for Mademoiselle Eugenie (to whom under

　　happier circumstances we once hoped to be allied) to act in this

　　matter before you have spoken to her about it--

　　There Eugenie paused, and coldly returned the letter without finishingit.

　　"I thank you," she said to Madame des Grassins.

　　"Ah! you have the voice and manner of your deceased father," Madamedes Grassins replied.

　　"Madame, you have eight thousand francs to pay us," said Nanon,producing Charles's cheque.

　　"That's true; have the kindness to come with me now, MadameCornoiller."

　　"Monsieur le cure," said Eugenie with a noble composure, inspired bythe thought she was about to express, "would it be a sin to remain avirgin after marriage?"

　　"That is a case of conscience whose solution is not within myknowledge. If you wish to know what the celebrated Sanchez says of itin his treatise 'De Matrimonio,' I shall be able to tell youto-morrow."

　　The cure went away; Mademoiselle Grandet went up to her father'ssecret room and spent the day there alone, without coming down todinner, in spite of Nanon's entreaties. She appeared in the evening atthe hour when the usual company began to arrive. Never was the oldhall so full as on this occasion. The news of Charles's return and hisfoolish treachery had spread through the whole town. But howeverwatchful the curiosity of the visitors might be, it was leftunsatisfied. Eugenie, who expected scrutiny, allowed none of the cruelemotions that wrung her soul to appear on the calm surface of herface. She was able to show a smiling front in answer to all who triedto testify their interest by mournful looks or melancholy speeches.She hid her misery behind a veil of courtesy. Towards nine o'clock thegames ended and the players left the tables, paying their losses anddiscussing points of the game as they joined the rest of the company.At the moment when the whole party rose to take leave, an unexpectedand striking event occurred, which resounded through the length andbreadth of Saumur, from thence through the arrondissement, and even tothe four surrounding prefectures.

　　"Stay, monsieur le president," said Eugenie to Monsieur de Bonfons asshe saw him take his cane.

　　There was not a person in that numerous assembly who was unmoved bythese words. The president turned pale, and was forced to sit down."The president gets the millions," said Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt."It is plain enough; the president marries Mademoiselle Grandet,"cried Madame d'Orsonval.

　　"All the trumps in one hand," said the abbe.

　　"A love game," said the notary.

　　Each and all said his say, made his pun, and looked at the heiressmounted on her millions as on a pedestal. The drama begun nine yearsbefore had reached its conclusion. To tell the president, in face ofall Saumur, to "stay," was surely the same thing as proclaiming himher husband. In provincial towns social conventionalities are sorigidly enforced than an infraction like this constituted a solemnpromise.

　　"Monsieur le president," said Eugenie in a voice of some emotion whenthey were left alone, "I know what pleases you in me. Swear to leaveme free during my whole life, to claim none of the rights whichmarriage will give you over me, and my hand is yours. Oh!" she added,seeing him about to kneel at her feet, "I have more to say. I must notdeceive you. In my heart I cherish one inextinguishable feeling.Friendship is the only sentiment which I can give to a husband. I wishneither to affront him nor to violate the laws of my own heart. Butyou can possess my hand and my fortune only at the cost of doing me aninestimable service."

　　"I am ready for all things," said the president.

　　"Here are fifteen hundred thousand francs," she said, drawing from herbosom a certificate of a hundred shares in the Bank of France. "Go toParis,--not to-morrow, but instantly. Find Monsieur des Grassins,learn the names of my uncle's creditors, call them together, pay themin full all that was owing, with interest at five per cent from theday the debt was incurred to the present time. Be careful to obtain afull and legal receipt, in proper form, before a notary. You are amagistrate, and I can trust this matter in your hands. You are a manof honor; I will put faith in your word, and meet the dangers of lifeunder shelter of your name. Let us have mutual indulgence. We haveknown each other so long that we are almost related; you would notwish to render me unhappy."

　　The president fell at the feet of the rich heiress, his heart beatingand wrung with joy.

　　"I will be your slave!" he said.

　　"When you obtain the receipts, monsieur," she resumed, with a coldglance, "you will take them with all the other papers to my cousinGrandet, and you will give him this letter. On your return I will keepmy word."

　　The president understood perfectly that he owed the acquiescence ofMademoiselle Grandet to some bitterness of love, and he made haste toobey her orders, lest time should effect a reconciliation between thepair.

　　When Monsieur de Bonfons left her, Eugenie fell back in her chair andburst into tears. All was over.

　　The president took the mail-post, and reached Paris the next evening.The morning after his arrival he went to see des Grassins, andtogether they summoned the creditors to meet at the notary's officewhere the vouchers had been deposited. Not a single creditor failed tobe present. Creditors though they were, justice must be done to them,--they were all punctual. Monsieur de Bonfons, in the name ofMademoiselle Grandet, paid them the amount of their claims withinterest. The payment of interest was a remarkable event in theParisian commerce of that day. When the receipts were all legallyregistered, and des Grassins had received for his services the sum offifty thousand francs allowed to him by Eugenie, the president madehis way to the hotel d'Aubrion and found Charles just entering his ownapartment after a serious encounter with his prospective father-in-law. The old marquis had told him plainly that he should not marry hisdaughter until all the creditors of Guillaume Grandet had been paid infull.

　　The president gave Charles the following letter:--

　　My Cousin,--Monsieur le president de Bonfons has undertaken to

　　place in your hands the aquittance for all claims upon my uncle,

　　also a receipt by which I acknowledge having received from you the

　　sum total of those claims. I have heard of a possible failure, and

　　I think that the son of a bankrupt may not be able to marry

　　Mademoiselle d'Aubrion. Yes, my cousin, you judged rightly of my

　　mind and of my manners. I have, it is true, no part in the world;

　　I understand neither its calculations nor its customs; and I could

　　not give you the pleasures that you seek in it. Be happy,

　　according to the social conventions to which you have sacrificed

　　our love. To make your happiness complete I can only offer you

　　your father's honor. Adieu! You will always have a faithful friend

　　in your cousin

　　Eugenie.

　　The president smiled at the exclamation which the ambitious young mancould not repress as he received the documents.

　　"We shall announce our marriages at the same time," remarked Monsieurde Bonfons.

　　"Ah! you marry Eugenie? Well, I am delighted; she is a good girl.But," added Charles, struck with a luminous idea, "she must be rich?""She had," said the president, with a mischievous smile, "aboutnineteen millions four days ago; but she has only seventeen millionsto-day."

　　Charles looked at him thunderstruck.

　　"Seventeen mil--"

　　"Seventeen millions; yes, monsieur. We shall muster, MademoiselleGrandet and I, an income of seven hundred and fifty thousand francswhen we marry."

　　"My dear cousin," said Charles, recovering a little of his assurance,"we can push each other's fortunes."

　　"Agreed," said the president. "Here is also a little case which I amcharged to give into your own hands," he added, placing on the tablethe leather box which contained the dressing-case.

　　"Well, my dear friend," said Madame d'Aubrion, entering the roomwithout noticing the president, "don't pay any attention to what poorMonsieur d'Aubrion has just said to you; the Duchesse de Chaulieu hasturned his head. I repeat, nothing shall interfere with themarriage--"

　　"Very good, madame. The three millions which my father owed were paidyesterday."

　　"In money?" she asked.

　　"Yes, in full, capital and interest; and I am about to do honor to hismemory--"

　　"What folly!" exclaimed his mother-in-law. "Who is this?" shewhispered in Grandet's ear, perceiving the president.

　　"My man of business," he answered in a low voice.

　　The marquise bowed superciliously to Monsieur de Bonfons."We are pushing each other's fortunes already," said the president,taking up his hat. "Good-by, cousin."

　　"He is laughing at me, the old cockatoo! I'd like to put six inches ofiron into him!" muttered Charles.

　　The president was out of hearing. Three days later Monsieur deBonfons, on his return to Saumur, announced his marriage with Eugenie.Six months after the marriage he was appointed councillor in the Courroyale at Angers. Before leaving Saumur Madame de Bonfons had the goldof certain jewels, once so precious to her, melted up, and put,together with the eight thousand francs paid back by her cousin, intoa golden pyx, which she gave to the parish church where she had solong prayed for /him/. She now spent her time between Angers andSaumur. Her husband, who had shown some public spirit on a certainoccasion, became a judge in the superior courts, and finally, after afew years, president of them. He was anxiously awaiting a generalelection, in the hope of being returned to the Chamber of deputies. Hehankered after a peerage; and then--

　　"The king will be his cousin, won't he?" said Nanon, la Grande Nanon,Madame Cornoiller, bourgeoise of Saumur, as she listened to hermistress, who was recounting the honors to which she was called.Nevertheless, Monsieur de Bonfons (he had finally abolished hispatronymic of Cruchot) did not realize any of his ambitious ideas. Hedied eight days after his election as deputy of Saumur. God, who seesall and never strikes amiss, punished him, no doubt, for his sordidcalculations and the legal cleverness with which, /accurante Cruchot/,he had drawn up his marriage contract, in which husband and wife gaveto each other, "in case they should have no children, their entireproperty of every kind, landed or otherwise, without exception orreservation, dispensing even with the formality of an inventory;provided that said omission of said inventory shall not injure theirheirs and assigns, it being understood that this deed of gift is,etc., etc." This clause of the contract will explain the profoundrespect which monsieur le president always testified for the wishes,and above all, for the solitude of Madame de Bonfons. Women cited himas the most considerate and delicate of men, pitied him, and even wentso far as to find fault with the passion and grief of Eugenie, blamingher, as women know so well how to blame, with cruel but discreetinsinuation.

　　"Madame de Bonfons must be very ill to leave her husband entirelyalone. Poor woman! Is she likely to get well? What is it? Somethinggastric? A cancer?"--"She has grown perfectly yellow. She ought toconsult some celebrated doctor in Paris."--"How can she be happywithout a child? They say she loves her husband; then why not give himan heir?--in his position, too!"--"Do you know, it is really dreadful!If it is the result of mere caprice, it is unpardonable. Poorpresident!"


　

