
　　But at that moment the summons sounded for dinner; all re-enteredthe house. The odour which now filled the refectory was scarcelymore appetising than that which had regaled our nostrils at breakfast:the dinner was served in two huge tin-plated vessels, whence rose astrong steam redolent of rancid fat. I found the mess to consist ofindifferent potatoes and strange shreds of rusty meat, mixed andcooked together. Of this preparation a tolerably abundant plateful wasapportioned to each pupil. I ate what I could, and wondered withinmyself whether every day's fare would be like this.

　　After dinner, we immediately adjourned to the schoolroom: lessonsrecommenced, and were continued till five o'clock.

　　The only marked event of the afternoon was, that I saw the girlwith whom I had conversed in the verandah dismissed in disgrace byMiss Scatcherd from a history class, and sent to stand in the middleof the large schoolroom. The punishment seemed to me in a highdegree ignominious, especially for so great a girl- she lookedthirteen or upwards. I expected she would show signs of great distressand shame; but to my surprise she neither wept nor blushed:composed, though grave, she stood, the central mark of all eyes.'How can she bear it so quietly- so firmly?' I asked of myself.'Were I in her place, it seems to me I should wish the earth to openand swallow me up. She looks as if she were thinking of somethingbeyond her punishment- beyond her situation: of something not roundher nor before her. I have heard of day-dreams- is she in aday-dream now? Her eyes are fixed on the floor, but I am sure theydo not see it- her sight seems turned in, gone down into her heart:she is looking at what she can remember, I believe; not at what isreally present. I wonder what sort of a girl she is- whether good ornaughty.'

　　Soon after five P.M. we had another meal, consisting of a small mugof coffee, and half a slice of brown bread. I devoured my bread anddrank my coffee with relish; but I should have been glad of as muchmore- I was still hungry. Half an hour's recreation succeeded, thenstudy; then the glass of water and the piece of oat-cake, prayers, andbed. Such was my first day at Lowood.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER VI--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　THE next day commenced as before, getting up and dressing byrushlight; but this morning we were obliged to dispense with theceremony of washing; the water in the pitchers was frozen. A changehad taken place in the weather the preceding evening, and a keennorth-east wind, whistling through the crevices of our bedroom windowsall night long, had made us shiver in our beds, and turned thecontents of the ewers to ice.

　　Before the long hour and a half of prayers and Bible-reading wasover, I felt ready to perish with cold. Breakfast-time came at last,and this morning the porridge was not burnt; the quality waseatable, the quantity small. How small my portion seemed! I wishedit had been doubled.

　　In the course of the day I was enrolled a member of the fourthclass, and regular tasks and occupations were assigned me: hitherto, Ihad only been a spectator of the proceedings at Lowood; I was now tobecome an actor therein. At first, being little accustomed to learn byheart, the lessons appeared to me both long and difficult; thefrequent change from task to task, too, bewildered me; and I wasglad when, about three o'clock in the afternoon, Miss Smith put intomy hands a border of muslin two yards long, together with needle,thimble, etc., and sent me to sit in a quiet corner of the schoolroom,with directions to hem the same. At that hour most of the otherswere sewing likewise; but one class still stood round Miss Scatcherd'schair reading, and as all was quiet, the subject of their lessonscould be heard, together with the manner in which each girlacquitted herself, and the animadversions or commendations of MissScatcherd on the performance. It was English history: among thereaders I observed my acquaintance of the verandah: at thecommencement of the lesson, her place had been at the top of theclass, but for some error of pronunciation, or some inattention tostops, she was suddenly sent to the very bottom. Even in thatobscure position, Miss Scatcherd continued to make her an object ofconstant notice; she was continually addressing to her such phrases asthe following:-

　　'Burns' (such it seems was her name: the girls here were all calledby their surnames, as boys are elsewhere), 'Burns, you are standing onthe side of your shoe; turn your toes out immediately.' 'Burns, youpoke your chin most unpleasantly; draw it in.' 'Burns, I insist onyour holding your head up; I will not have you before me in thatattitude,' etc. etc.

　　A chapter having been read through twice, the books were closed andthe girls examined. The lesson had comprised part of the reign ofCharles I, and there were sundry questions about tonnage andpoundage and ship-money, which most of them appeared unable to answer;still, every little difficulty was solved instantly when it reachedBurns: her memory seemed to have retained the substance of the wholelesson, and she was ready with answers on every point. I keptexpecting that Miss Scatcherd would praise her attention; but, insteadof that, she suddenly cried out-

　　'You dirty, disagreeable girl! you have never cleaned your nailsthis morning!'

　　Burns made no answer: I wondered at her silence.

　　'Why,' thought I, 'does she not explain that she could neitherclean her nails nor wash her face, as the water was frozen?'

　　My attention was now called off by Miss Smith desiring me to hold askein of thread: while she was winding it, she talked to me fromtime to time, asking whether I had ever been at school before, whetherI could mark, stitch, knit, etc.; till she dismissed me, I could notpursue my observations on Miss Scatcherd's movements. When Ireturned to my seat, that lady was just delivering an order of which Idid not catch the import; but Burns immediately left the class, andgoing into the small inner room where the books were kept, returned inhalf a minute, carrying in her hand a bundle of twigs tied together atone end. This ominous tool she presented to Miss Scatcherd with arespectful curtsey; then she quietly, and without being told, unloosedher pinafore, and the teacher instantly and sharply inflicted on herneck a dozen strokes with the bunch of twigs. Not a tear rose toBurns's eye; and, while I paused from my sewing, because my fingersquivered at this spectacle with a sentiment of unavailing and impotentanger, not a feature of her pensive face altered its ordinaryexpression.

　　'Hardened girl!' exclaimed Miss Scatcherd; 'nothing can correct youof your slatternly habits: carry the rod away.'

　　Burns obeyed: I looked at her narrowly as she emerged from thebook-closet; she was just putting back her handkerchief into herpocket, and the trace of a tear glistened on her thin cheek.

　　The play-hour in the evening I thought the pleasantest fractionof the day at Lowood: the bit of bread, the draught of coffeeswallowed at five o'clock had revived vitality, if it had notsatisfied hunger: the long restraint of the day was slackened; theschoolroom felt warmer than in the morning- its fires being allowed toburn a little more brightly, to supply, in some measure, the placeof candles, not yet introduced: the ruddy gloaming, the licenseduproar, the confusion of many voices gave one a welcome sense ofliberty.

　　On the evening of the day on which I had seen Miss Scatcherd flogher pupil, Burns, I wandered as usual among the forms and tables andlaughing groups without a companion, yet not feeling lonely: when Ipassed the windows, I now and then lifted a blind, and looked out;it snowed fast, a drift was already forming against the lower panes;putting my ear close to the window, I could distinguish from thegleeful tumult within, the disconsolate moan of the wind outside.

　　Probably, if I had lately left a good home and kind parents, thiswould have been the hour when I should most keenly have regrettedthe separation; that wind would then have saddened my heart, thisobscure chaos would have disturbed my peace! as it was, I derived fromboth a strange excitement, and reckless and feverish, I wished thewind to howl more wildly, the gloom to deepen to darkness, and theconfusion to rise to clamour.

　　Jumping over forms, and creeping under tables, I made my way to oneof the fire-places; there, kneeling by the high wire fender, I foundBurns, absorbed, silent, abstracted from all round her by thecompanionship of a book, which she read by the dim glare of theembers.

　　'Is it still Rasselas?' I asked, coming behind her.

　　'Yes,' she said, 'and I have just finished it.'

　　And in five minutes more she shut it up. I was glad of this.

　　'Now,' thought I, 'I can perhaps get her to talk.' I sat down byher on the floor.

　　'What is your name besides Burns?'

　　'Helen.'

　　'Do you come a long way from here?'

　　'I come from a place farther north, quite on the borders ofScotland.'

　　'Will you ever go back?'

　　'I hope so; but nobody can be sure of the future.'

　　'You must wish to leave Lowood?'

　　'No! why should I? I was sent to Lowood to get an education; and itwould be of no use going away until I have attained that object.'

　　'But that teacher, Miss Scatcherd, is so cruel to you?'

　　'Cruel? Not at all! She is severe: she dislikes my faults.'

　　'And if I were in your place I should dislike her; I shouldresist her. If she struck me with that rod, I should get it from herhand; I should break it under her nose.'

　　'Probably you would do nothing of the sort: but if you did, Mr.Brocklehurst would expel you from the school; that would be a greatgrief to your relations. It is far better to endure patiently asmart which nobody feels but yourself, than to commit a hasty actionwhose evil consequences will extend to all connected with you; andbesides, the Bible bids us return good for evil.'

　　'But then it seems disgraceful to be flogged, and to be sent tostand in the middle of a room full of people; and you are such a greatgirl: I am far younger than you, and I could not bear it.'

　　'Yet it would be your duty to bear it, if you could not avoid it:it is weak and silly to say you cannot bear what it is your fate to berequired to bear.'

　　I heard her with wonder: I could not comprehend this doctrine ofendurance; and still less could I understand or sympathise with theforbearance she expressed for her chastiser. Still I felt that HelenBurns considered things by a light invisible to my eyes. I suspectedshe might be right and I wrong; but I would not ponder the matterdeeply; like Felix, I put it off to a more convenient season.

　　'You say you have faults, Helen: what are they? To me you seem verygood.'

　　'Then learn from me, not to judge by appearances: I am, as MissScatcherd said, slatternly; I seldom put, and never keep, things inorder; I am careless; I forget rules; I read when I should learn mylessons; I have no method; and sometimes I say, like you, I cannotbear to be subjected to systematic arrangements. This is all veryprovoking to Miss Scatcherd, who is naturally neat, punctual, andparticular.'

　　'And cross and cruel,' I added; but Helen Burns would not admitmy addition: she kept silence.

　　'Is Miss Temple as severe to you as Miss Scatcherd?'

　　At the utterance of Miss Temple's name, a soft smile flitted overher grave face.

　　'Miss Temple is full of goodness; it pains her to be severe toany one, even the worst in the school: she sees my errors, and tellsme of them gently; and if I do anything worthy of praise, she gives memy meed liberally. One strong proof of my wretchedly defectivenature is, that even her expostulations, so mild, so rational, have noinfluence to cure me of my faults; and even her praise, though I valueit most highly, cannot stimulate me to continued care and foresight.'

　　'That is curious,' said I, 'it is so easy to be careful.'

　　'For you I have no doubt it is. I observed you in your class thismorning, and saw you were closely attentive: your thoughts neverseemed to wander while Miss Miller explained the lesson and questionedyou. Now, mine continually rove away; when I should be listening toMiss Scatcherd, and collecting all she says with assiduity, often Ilose the very sound of her voice; I fall into a sort of dream.Sometimes I think I am in Northumberland, and that the noises I hearround me are the bubbling of a little brook which runs throughDeepden, near our house;- then, when it comes to my turn to reply, Ihave to be awakened; and having heard nothing of what was read forlistening to the visionary brook, I have no answer ready.'

　　'Yet how well you replied this afternoon.'

　　'It was mere chance; the subject on which we had been reading hadinterested me. This afternoon, instead of dreaming of Deepden, I waswondering how a man who wished to do right could act so unjustly andunwisely as Charles the First sometimes did; and I thought what a pityit was that, with his integrity and conscientiousness, he could see nofarther than the prerogatives of the crown. If he had but been able tolook to a distance, and see how what they call the spirit of the agewas tending! Still, I like Charles- I respect him- I pity him, poormurdered king! Yes, his enemies were the worst: they shed blood theyhad no right to shed. How dared they kill him!'

　　Helen was talking to herself now: she had forgotten I could notvery well understand her- that I was ignorant, or nearly so, of thesubject she discussed. I recalled her to my level.

　　'And when Miss Temple teaches you, do your thoughts wander then?'

　　'No, certainly, not often: because Miss Temple has generallysomething to say which is newer than my own reflections; herlanguage is singularly agreeable to me, and the information shecommunicates is often just what I wished to gain.'

　　'Well, then, with Miss Temple you are good?'

　　'Yes, in a passive way: I make no effort; I follow as inclinationguides me. There is no merit in such goodness.'

　　'A great deal: you are good to those who are good to you. It is allI ever desire to be. If people were always kind and obedient tothose who are cruel and unjust, the wicked people would have it alltheir own way: they would never feel afraid, and so they would neveralter, but would grow worse and worse. When we are struck at without areason, we should strike back again very hard; I am sure we should- sohard as to teach the person who struck us never to do it again.'

　　'You will change your mind, I hope, when you grow older: as yet youare but a little untaught girl.'

　　'But I feel this, Helen; I must dislike those who, whatever I do toplease them, persist in disliking me; I must resist those who punishme unjustly. It is as natural as that I should love those who showme affection, or submit to punishment when I feel it is deserved.'

　　'Heathens and savage tribes hold that doctrine, but Christiansand civilised nations disown it.'

　　'How? I don't understand.'

　　'It is not violence that best overcomes hate- nor vengeance thatmost certainly heals injury.'

　　'What then?'

　　'Read the New Testament, and observe what Christ says, and how Heacts; make His word your rule, and His conduct your example.'

　　'What does He say?'

　　'Love your enemies; bless them that curse you; do good to them thathate you and despitefully use you.'

　　'Then I should love Mrs. Reed, which I cannot do; I should blessher son John, which is impossible.'

　　In her turn, Helen Burns asked me to explain, and I proceededforthwith to pour out, in my own way, the tale of my sufferings andresentments. Bitter and truculent when excited, I spoke as I felt,without reserve or softening.

　　Helen heard me patiently to the end: I expected she would then makea remark, but she said nothing.

　　'Well,' I asked impatiently, 'is not Mrs. Reed a hard-hearted,bad woman?'

　　'She has been unkind to you, no doubt; because you see, shedislikes your cast of character, as Miss Scatcherd does mine; buthow minutely you remember all she has done and said to you! What asingularly deep impression her injustice seems to have made on yourheart! No ill-usage so brands its record on my feelings. Would you notbe happier if you tried to forget her severity, together with thepassionate emotions it excited? Life appears to me too short to bespent in nursing animosity or registering wrongs. We are, and must be,one and all, burdened with faults in this world: but the time willsoon come when, I trust, we shall put them off in putting off ourcorruptible bodies; when debasement and sin will fall from us withthis cumbrous frame of flesh, and only the spark of the spirit willremain,- the impalpable principle of light and thought, pure as whenit left the Creator to inspire the creature: whence it came it willreturn; perhaps again to be communicated to some being higher thanman- perhaps to pass through gradations of glory, from the palehuman soul to brighten to the seraph! Surely it Will never, on thecontrary, be suffered to degenerate from man to fiend? No; I cannotbelieve that: I hold another creed: which no one ever taught me, andwhich I seldom mention; but in which I delight, and to which Icling: for it extends hope to all: it makes Eternity a rest- amighty home, not a terror and an abyss. Besides, with this creed, Ican so clearly distinguish between the criminal and his crime; I canso sincerely forgive the first while I abhor the last: with this creedrevenge never worries my heart, degradation never too deeplydisgusts me, injustice never crushes me too low: I live in calm,looking to the end.'

　　Helen's head, always drooping, sank a little lower as shefinished this sentence. I saw by her look she wished no longer to talkto me, but rather to converse with her own thoughts. She was notallowed much time for meditation: a monitor, a great rough girl,presently came up, exclaiming in a strong Cumberland accent-

　　'Helen Burns, if you don't go and put your drawer in order, andfold up your work this minute, I'll tell Miss Scatcherd to come andlook at it!'

　　Helen sighed as her reverie fled, and getting up, obeyed themonitor without reply as without delay.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER VII--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　MY first quarter at Lowood seemed an age; and not the golden ageeither; it comprised an irksome struggle with difficulties inhabituating myself to new rules and unwonted tasks. The fear offailure in these points harassed me worse than the physicalhardships of my lot; though these were no trifles.

　　During January, February, and part of March, the deep snows, and,after their melting, the almost impassable roads, prevented ourstirring beyond the garden walls, except to go to church; but withinthese limits we had to pass an hour every day in the open air. Ourclothing was insufficient to protect us from the severe cold: we hadno boots, the snow got into our shoes and melted there: our unglovedhands became numbed and covered with chilblains, as were our feet: Iremember well the distracting irritation I endured from this causeevery evening, when my feet inflamed; and the torture of thrusting theswelled, raw, and stiff toes into my shoes in the morning. Then thescanty supply of food was distressing: with the keen appetites ofgrowing children, we had scarcely sufficient to keep alive adelicate invalid. From this deficiency of nourishment resulted anabuse, which pressed hardly on the younger pupils: whenever thefamished great girls had an opportunity, they would coax or menace thelittle ones out of their portion. Many a time I have shared betweentwo claimants the precious morsel of brown bread distributed atteatime; and after relinquishing to a third half the contents of mymug of coffee, I have swallowed the remainder with an accompaniment ofsecret tears, forced from me by the exigency of hunger.

　　Sundays were dreary days in that wintry season. We had to walktwo miles to Brocklebridge Church, where our patron officiated. We setout cold, we arrived at church colder: during the morning service webecame almost paralysed. It was too far to return to dinner, and anallowance of cold meat and bread, in the same penurious proportionobserved in our ordinary meals, was served round between the services.

　　At the close of the afternoon service we returned by an exposed andhilly road, where the bitter winter wind, blowing over a range ofsnowy summits to the north, almost flayed the skin from our faces.

　　I can remember Miss Temple walking lightly and rapidly along ourdrooping line, her plaid cloak, which the frosty wind fluttered,gathered close about her, and encouraging us, by precept andexample, to keep up our spirits, and march forward, as she said, 'likestalwart soldiers.' The other teachers, poor things, were generallythemselves too much dejected to attempt the task of cheering others.

　　How we longed for the light and heat of a blazing fire when wegot back! But, to the little ones at least, this was denied: eachhearth in the schoolroom was immediately surrounded by a double row ofgreat girls, and behind them the younger children crouched ingroups, wrapping their starved arms in their pinafores.

　　A little solace came at tea-time, in the shape of a double rationof bread- a whole, instead of a half, slice- with the deliciousaddition of a thin scrape of butter: it was the hebdomadal treat towhich we all looked forward from Sabbath to Sabbath. I generallycontrived to reserve a moiety of this bounteous repast for myself; butthe remainder I was invariably obliged to part with.

　　The Sunday evening was spent in repeating, by heart, the ChurchCatechism, and the fifth, sixth, and seventh chapters of St.Matthew; and in listening to a long sermon, read by Miss Miller, whoseirrepressible yawns attested her weariness. A frequent interlude ofthese performances was the enactment of the part of Eutychus by somehalf-dozen of little girls, who, overpowered with sleep, would falldown, if not out of the third loft, yet off the fourth form, and betaken up half dead. The remedy was, to thrust them forward into thecentre of the schoolroom, and oblige them to stand there till thesermon was finished. Sometimes their feet failed them, and they sanktogether in a heap; they were then propped up with the monitors'high stools.

　　I have not yet alluded to the visits of Mr. Brocklehurst; andindeed that gentleman was from home during the greater part of thefirst month after my arrival; perhaps prolonging his stay with hisfriend the archdeacon: his absence was a relief to me. I need notsay that I had my own reasons for dreading his coming: but come he didat last.

　　One afternoon (I had then been three weeks at Lowood), as I wassitting with a slate in my hand, puzzling over a sum in long division,my eyes, raised in abstraction to the window, caught sight of a figurejust passing: I recognised almost instinctively that gaunt outline;and when, two minutes after, all the school, teachers included, roseen masse, it was not necessary for me to look up in order to ascertainwhose entrance they thus greeted. A long stride measured theschoolroom, and presently beside Miss Temple, who herself had risen,stood the same black column which had frowned on me so ominouslyfrom the hearthrug of Gateshead. I now glanced sideways at thispiece of architecture. Yes, I was right: it was Mr. Brocklehurst,buttoned up in a surtout, and looking longer, narrower, and more rigidthan ever.

　　I had my own reasons for being dismayed at this apparition; toowell I remembered the perfidious hints given by Mrs. Reed about mydisposition, etc.; the promise pledged by Mr. Brocklehurst toapprise Miss Temple and the teachers of my vicious nature. All along Ihad been dreading the fulfilment of this promise,- I had beenlooking out daily for the 'Coming Man,' whose information respectingmy past life and conversation was to brand me as a bad child for ever:now there he was.

　　He stood at Miss Temple's side; he was speaking low in her ear: Idid not doubt he was making disclosures of my villainy; and Iwatched her eye with painful anxiety, expecting every moment to seeits dark orb turn on me a glance of repugnance and contempt. Ilistened too; and as I happened to be seated quite at the top of theroom, I caught most of what he said: its import relieved me fromimmediate apprehension.

　　'I suppose, Miss Temple, the thread I bought at Lowton will do;it struck me that it would be just of the quality for the calicochemises, and I sorted the needles to match. You may tell Miss Smiththat I forgot to make a memorandum of the darning needles, but sheshall have some papers sent in next week; and she is not, on anyaccount, to give out more than one at a time to each pupil: if theyhave more, they are apt to be careless and lose them. And, O ma'am!I wish the woollen stockings were better looked to!- when I was herelast, I went into the kitchen-garden and examined the clothes dryingon the line; there was a quantity of black hose in a very bad state ofrepair: from the size of the holes in them I was sure they had notbeen well mended from time to time.'

　　He paused.

　　'Your directions shall be attended to, sir,' said Miss Temple.

　　'And, ma'am,' he continued, 'the laundress tells me some of thegirls have two clean tuckers in the week: it is too much; the ruleslimit them to one.'

　　'I think I can explain that circumstance, sir. Agnes andCatherine Johnstone were invited to take tea with some friends atLowton last Thursday, and I gave them leave to put on clean tuckersfor the occasion.'

　　Mr. Brocklehurst nodded.

　　'Well, for once it may pass; but please not to let the circumstanceoccur too often. And there is another thing which surprised me; Ifind, in settling accounts with the housekeeper, that a lunch,consisting of bread and cheese, has twice been served out to the girlsduring the past fortnight. How is this? I looked over the regulations,and I find no such meal as lunch mentioned. Who introduced thisinnovation? and by what authority?'

　　'I must be responsible for the circumstance, sir,' replied MissTemple: 'the breakfast was so ill prepared that the pupils could notpossibly eat it; and I dared not allow them to remain fasting tilldinner-time.'

　　'Madam, allow me an instant. You are aware that my plan in bringingup these girls is, not to accustom them to habits of luxury andindulgence, but to render them hardy, patient, self-denying. Shouldany little accidental disappointment of the appetite occur, such asthe spoiling of a meal, the under or the over dressing of a dish,the incident ought not to be neutralised by replacing with somethingmore delicate the comfort lost, thus pampering the body andobviating the aim of this institution; it ought to be improved tothe spiritual edification of the pupils, by encouraging them to evincefortitude under the temporary privation. A brief address on thoseoccasions would not be mistimed, wherein a judicious instructorwould take the opportunity of referring to the sufferings of theprimitive Christians; to the torments of martyrs; to theexhortations of our blessed Lord Himself, calling upon His disciplesto take up their cross and follow Him; to His warnings that manshall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth outof the mouth of God; to His divine consolations, "If ye sufferhunger or thirst for My sake, happy are ye." Oh, madam, when you putbread and cheese, instead of burnt porridge, into these children'smouths, you may indeed feed their vile bodies, but you little thinkhow you starve their immortal souls!'

　　Mr. Brocklehurst again paused- perhaps overcome by his feelings.Miss Temple had looked down when he first began to speak to her; butshe now gazed straight before her, and her face, naturally pale asmarble, appeared to be assuming also the coldness and fixity of thatmaterial; especially her mouth, closed as if it would have requireda sculptor's chisel to open it, and her brow settled gradually intopetrified severity.

　　Meantime, Mr. Brocklehurst, standing on the hearth with his handsbehind his back, majestically surveyed the whole school. Suddenlyhis eye gave a blink, as if it had met something that either dazzledor shocked its pupil; turning, he said in more rapid accents than hehad hitherto used-

　　'Miss Temple, Miss Temple, what- what is that girl with curledhair? Red hair, ma'am, curled- curled all over?' And extending hiscane he pointed to the awful object, his hand shaking as he did so.

　　'It is Julia Severn,' replied Miss Temple, very quietly.

　　'Julia Severn, ma'am! And why has she, or any other, curled hair?Why, in defiance of every precept and principle of this house, doesshe conform to the world so openly- here in an evangelical, charitableestablishment- as to wear her hair one mass of curls?'

　　'Julia's hair curls naturally,' returned Miss Temple, still morequietly.

　　'Naturally! Yes, but we are not to conform to nature; I wishthese girls to be the children of Grace: and why that abundance? Ihave again and again intimated that I desire the hair to be arrangedclosely, modestly, plainly. Miss Temple, that girl's hair must becut off entirely; I will send a barber tomorrow: and I see otherswho have far too much of the excrescence- that tall girl, tell herto turn round. Tell all the first form to rise up and direct theirfaces to the wall.'

　　Miss Temple passed her handkerchief over her lips, as if tosmooth away the involuntary smile that curled them; she gave theorder, however, and when the first class could take in what wasrequired of them, they obeyed. Leaning a little back on my bench, Icould see the looks and grimaces with which they commented on thismanoeuvre: it was a pity Mr. Brocklehurst could not see them too; hewould perhaps have felt that, whatever he might do with the outside ofthe cup and platter, the inside was further beyond his interferencethan he imagined.

　　He scrutinised the reverse of these living medals some fiveminutes, then pronounced sentence. These words fell like the knellof doom-

　　'All those top-knots must be cut off.'

　　Miss Temple seemed to remonstrate.

　　'Madam,' he pursued, 'I have a Master to serve whose kingdom is notof this world: my mission is to mortify in these girls the lusts ofthe flesh; to teach them to clothe themselves with shame-facedness andsobriety, not with braided hair and costly apparel; and each of theyoung persons before us has a string of hair twisted in plaits whichvanity itself might have woven; these, I repeat, must be cut off;think of the time wasted, of-'

　　Mr. Brocklehurst was here interrupted: three other visitors,ladies, now entered the room. They ought to have come a littlesooner to have heard his lecture on dress, for they were splendidlyattired in velvet, silk, and furs. The two younger of the trio (finegirls of sixteen and seventeen) had grey beaver hats, then in fashion,shaded with ostrich plumes, and from under the brim of this gracefulhead-dress fell a profusion of light tresses, elaborately curled;the elder lady was enveloped in a costly velvet shawl, trimmed withermine, and she wore a false front of French curls.

　　These ladies were deferentially received by Miss Temple, as Mrs.and the Misses Brocklehurst, and conducted to seats of honour at thetop of the room. It seems they had come in the carriage with theirreverend relative, and had been conducting a rummaging scrutiny of theroom upstairs, while he transacted business with the housekeeper,questioned the laundress, and lectured the superintendent. They nowproceeded to address divers remarks and reproofs to Miss Smith, whowas charged with the care of the linen and the inspection of thedormitories: but I had no time to listen to what they said; othermatters called off and enchained my attention.

　　Hitherto, while gathering up the discourse of Mr. Brocklehurstand Miss Temple, I had not, at the same time, neglected precautions tosecure my personal safety; which I thought would be effected, if Icould only elude observation. To this end, I had sat well back onthe form, and while seeming to be busy with my sum, had held myslate in such a manner as to conceal my face: I might have escapednotice, had not my treacherous slate somehow happened to slip frommy hand, and falling with an obtrusive crash, directly drawn every eyeupon me; I knew it was all over now, and, as I stooped to pick upthe two fragments of slate, I rallied my forces for the worst. Itcame.

　　'A careless girl!' said Mr. Brocklehurst, and immediately after-'It is the new pupil, I perceive.' And before I could draw breath,'I must not forget I have a word to say respecting her.' Then aloud:how loud it seemed to me! 'Let the child who broke her slate comeforward!'

　　Of my own accord I could not have stirred; I was paralysed: but thetwo great girls who sat on each side of me, set me on my legs andpushed me towards the dread judge, and then Miss Temple gentlyassisted me to his very feet, and I caught her whispered counsel-

　　'Don't be afraid, Jane, I saw it was an accident; you shall notbe punished.'

　　The kind whisper went to my heart like a dagger.

　　'Another minute, and she will despise me for a hypocrite,'thought I; and an impulse of fury against Reed, Brocklehurst, andCo. bounded in my pulses at the conviction. I was no Helen Burns.

　　'Fetch that stool,' said Mr. Brocklehurst, pointing to a veryhigh one from which a monitor had just risen: it was brought.

　　'Place the child upon it.'

　　And I was placed there, by whom I don't know: I was in no conditionto note particulars; I was only aware that they had hoisted me up tothe height of Mr. Brocklehurst's nose, that he was within a yard ofme, and that a spread of shot orange and purple silk pelisses and acloud of silvery plumage extended and waved below me.

　　Mr. Brocklehurst hemmed.

　　'Ladies,' said he, turning to his family, 'Miss Temple, teachers,and children, you all see this girl?'

　　Of course they did; for I felt their eyes directed likeburning-glasses against my scorched skin.

　　'You see she is yet young; you observe she possesses the ordinaryform of childhood; God has graciously given her the shape that Hehas given to all of us; no signal deformity points her out as a markedcharacter. Who would think that the Evil One had already found aservant and agent in her? Yet such, I grieve to say, is the case.'

　　A pause- in which I began to steady the palsy of my nerves, andto feel that the Rubicon was passed; and that the trial, no longerto be shirked, must be firmly sustained.

　　'My dear children,' pursued the black marble clergyman, withpathos, 'this is a sad, a melancholy occasion; for it becomes myduty to warn you, that this girl, who might be one of God's own lambs,is a little castaway: not a member of the true flock, but evidently aninterloper and an alien. You must be on your guard against her; youmust shun her example; if necessary, avoid her company, exclude herfrom your sports, and shut her out from your converse. Teachers, youmust watch her: keep your eyes on her movements, weigh well her words,scrutinise her actions, punish her body to save her soul: if,indeed, such salvation be possible, for (my tongue falters while Itell it) this girl, this child, the native of a Christian land,worse than many a little heathen who says its prayers to Brahma andkneels before Juggernaut- this girl is- a liar!'

　　Now came a pause of ten minutes, during which I, by this time inperfect possession of my wits, observed all the female Brocklehurstsproduce their pocket-handkerchiefs and apply them to their optics,while the elderly lady swayed herself to and fro, and the twoyounger ones whispered, 'How shocking!'

　　Mr. Brocklehurst resumed.

　　'This I learned from her benefactress; from the pious andcharitable lady who adopted her in her orphan state, reared her as herown daughter, and whose kindness, whose generosity the unhappy girlrepaid by an ingratitude so bad, so dreadful, that at last herexcellent patroness was obliged to separate her from her own youngones, fearful lest her vicious example should contaminate theirpurity: she has sent her here to be healed, even as the Jews of oldsent their diseased to the troubled pool of Bethesda; and, teachers,superintendent, I beg of you not to allow the waters to stagnate roundher.'

　　With this sublime conclusion, Mr. Brocklehurst adjusted the topbutton of his surtout, muttered something to his family, who rose,bowed to Miss Temple, and then all the great people sailed in statefrom the room. Turning at the door, my judge said-

　　'Let her stand half an hour longer on that stool, and let no onespeak to her during the remainder of the day.'

　　There was I, then, mounted aloft; I, who had said I could notbear the shame of standing on my natural feet in the middle of theroom, was now exposed to general view on a pedestal of infamy. What mysensations were, no language can describe; but just as they allrose, stifling my breath and constricting my throat, a girl came upand passed me: in passing, she lifted her eyes. What a strange lightinspired them! What an extraordinary sensation that ray sent throughme! How the new feeling bore me up! It was as if a martyr, a hero, hadpassed a slave or victim, and imparted strength in the transit. Imastered the rising hysteria, lifted up my head, and took a firm standon the stool. Helen Burns asked some slight questions about her workof Miss Smith, was chidden for the triviality of the inquiry, returnedto her place, and smiled at me as she again went by. What a smile! Iremember it now, and I know that it was the effluence of fineintellect, of true courage; it lit up her marked lineaments, herthin face, her sunken grey eye, like a reflection from the aspect ofan angel. Yet at that moment Helen Burns wore on her arm 'the untidybadge;' scarcely an hour ago I had heard her condemned by MissScatcherd to a dinner of bread and water on the morrow because she hadblotted an exercise in copying it out. Such is the imperfect nature ofman! such spots are there on the disc of the clearest planet; and eyeslike Miss Scatcherd's can only see those minute defects, and are blindto the full brightness of the orb.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER VIII

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　ERE the half-hour ended, five o'clock struck; school was dismissed,and all were gone into the refectory to tea. I now ventured todescend: it was deep dusk; I retired into a corner and sat down on thefloor. The spell by which I had been so far supported began todissolve; reaction took place, and soon, so overwhelming was the griefthat seized me, I sank prostrate with my face to the ground. Now Iwept: Helen Burns was not here; nothing sustained me; left to myself Iabandoned myself, and my tears watered the boards. I had meant to beso good, and to do so much at Lowood: to make so many friends, to earnrespect and win affection. Already I had made visible progress; thatvery morning I had reached the head of my class; Miss Miller hadpraised me warmly; Miss Temple had smiled approbation; she hadpromised to teach me drawing, and to let me learn French, if Icontinued to make similar improvement two months longer: and then Iwas well received by my fellow-pupils; treated as an equal by those ofmy own age, and not molested by any; now, here I lay again crushed andtrodden on; and could I ever rise more?

　　'Never,' I thought; and ardently I wished to die. While sobbing outthis wish in broken accents, some one approached: I started up-again Helen Burns was near me; the fading fires just showed her comingup the long, vacant room; she brought my coffee and bread.

　　'Come, eat something,' she said; but I put both away from me,feeling as if a drop or a crumb would have choked me in my presentcondition. Helen regarded me, probably with surprise: I could notnow abate my agitation, though I tried hard; I continued to weepaloud. She sat down on the ground near me, embraced her knees with herarms, and rested her head upon them; in that attitude she remainedsilent as an Indian. I was the first who spoke-

　　'Helen, why do you stay with a girl whom everybody believes to be aliar?'

　　'Everybody, Jane? Why, there are only eighty people who haveheard you called so, and the world contains hundreds of millions.'

　　'But what have I to do with millions? The eighty, I know, despiseme.'

　　'Jane, you are mistaken: probably not one in the school eitherdespises or dislikes you: many, I am sure, pity you much.'

　　'How can they pity me after what Mr. Brocklehurst has said?'

　　'Mr. Brocklehurst is not a god: nor is he even a great andadmired man; he is little liked here; he never took steps to makehimself liked. Had he treated you as an especial favourite, youwould have found enemies, declared or covert, all around you; as itis, the greater number would offer you sympathy if they dared.Teachers and pupils may look coldly on you for a day or two, butfriendly feelings are concealed in their hearts; and if youpersevere in doing well, these feelings will ere long appear so muchthe more evidently for their temporary suppression. Besides, Jane'-she paused.

　　'Well, Helen?' said I, putting my hand into hers: she chafed myfingers gently to warm them, and went on-

　　'If all the world hated you, and believed you wicked, while yourown conscience approved you, and absolved you from guilt, you wouldnot be without friends.'

　　'No; I know I should think well of myself; but that is notenough: if others don't love me I would rather die than live- I cannotbear to be solitary and hated, Helen. Look here; to gain some realaffection from you, or Miss Temple, or any other whom I truly love,I would willingly submit to have the bone of my arm broken, or tolet a bull toss me, or to stand behind a kicking horse, and let itdash its hoof at my chest-'

　　'Hush, Jane! you think too much of the love of human beings; youare too impulsive, too vehement; the sovereign hand that createdyour frame, and put life into it, has provided you with otherresources than your feeble self, or than creatures feeble as you.Besides this earth, and besides the race of men, there is an invisibleworld and a kingdom of spirits: that world is round us, for it iseverywhere; and those spirits watch us, for they are commissioned toguard us; and if we were dying in pain and shame, if scorn smote us onall sides, and hatred crushed us, angels see our tortures, recogniseour innocence (if innocent we be: as I know you are of this chargewhich Mr. Brocklehurst has weakly and pompously repeated at secondhandfrom Mrs. Reed; for I read a sincere nature in your ardent eyes and onyour clear front), and God waits only the separation of spirit fromflesh to crown us with a full reward. Why, then, should we ever sinkoverwhelmed with distress, when life is so soon over, and death isso certain an entrance to happiness- to glory?'

　　I was silent; Helen had calmed me; but in the tranquillity sheimparted there was an alloy of inexpressible sadness. I felt theimpression of woe as she spoke, but I could not tell whence it came;and when, having done speaking, she breathed a little fast and cougheda short cough, I momentarily forgot my own sorrows to yield to a vagueconcern for her.

　　Resting my head on Helen's shoulder, I put my arms round her waist;she drew me to her, and we reposed in silence. We had not sat longthus, when another person came in. Some heavy clouds, swept from thesky by a rising wind, had left the moon bare; and her light, streamingin through a window near, shone full both on us and on the approachingfigure, which we at once recognised as Miss Temple.

　　'I came on purpose to find you, Jane Eyre,' said she; 'I want youin my room; and as Helen Burns is with you, she may come too.'

　　We went; following the superintendent's guidance, we had tothread some intricate passages, and mount a staircase before wereached her apartment; it contained a good fire, and lookedcheerful. Miss Temple told Helen Burns to be seated in a low arm-chairon one side of the hearth, and herself taking another, she called meto her side.

　　'Is it all over?' she asked, looking down at my face. 'Have youcried your grief away?'

　　'I am afraid I never shall do that.'

　　'Why?'

　　'Because I have been wrongly accused; and you, ma'am, and everybodyelse, will now think me wicked.'

　　'We shall think you what you prove yourself to be, my child.Continue to act as a good girl, and you will satisfy us.'

　　'Shall I, Miss Temple?'

　　'You will,' said she, passing her arm round me. 'And now tell mewho is the lady whom Mr. Brocklehurst called your benefactress?'

　　'Mrs. Reed, my uncle's wife. My uncle is dead, and he left me toher care.'

　　'Did she not, then, adopt you of her own accord?'

　　'No, ma'am; she was sorry to have to do it: but my uncle, as I haveoften heard the servants say, got her to promise before he died thatshe would always keep me.'

　　'Well now, Jane, you know, or at least I will tell you, that when acriminal is accused, he is always allowed to speak in his own defence.You have been charged with falsehood; defend yourself to me as well asyou can. Say whatever your memory suggests as true; but add nothingand exaggerate nothing.'

　　I resolved, in the depth of my heart, that I would be mostmoderate- most correct; and, having reflected a few minutes in orderto arrange coherently what I had to say, I told her all the story ofmy sad childhood. Exhausted by emotion, my language was more subduedthan it generally was when it developed that sad theme; and mindful ofHelen's warnings against the indulgence of resentment, I infusedinto the narrative far less of gall and wormwood than ordinary. Thusrestrained and simplified, it sounded more credible: I felt as Iwent on that Miss Temple fully believed me.

　　In the course of the tale I had mentioned Mr. Lloyd as havingcome to see me after the fit: for I never forgot the, to me, frightfulepisode of the red-room: in detailing which, my excitement was sure,in some degree, to break bounds; for nothing could soften in myrecollection the spasm of agony which clutched my heart when Mrs. Reedspurned my wild supplication for pardon, and locked me a second timein the dark and haunted chamber.

　　I had finished: Miss Temple regarded me a few minutes in silence;she then said-

　　'I know something of Mr. Lloyd; I shall write to him; if hisreply agrees with your statement, you shall be publicly cleared fromevery imputation; to me, Jane, you are clear now.'

　　She kissed me, and still keeping me at her side (where I was wellcontented to stand for I derived a child's pleasure from thecontemplation of her face, her dress, her one or two ornaments, herwhite forehead, her clustered and shining curls, and beaming darkeyes), she proceeded to address Helen Burns.

　　'How are you to-night, Helen? Have you coughed much to-day?'

　　'Not quite so much, I think, ma'am.'

　　'And the pain in your chest?'

　　'It is a little better.'

　　Miss Temple got up, took her hand and examined her pulse; thenshe returned to her own seat: as she resumed it, I heard her sigh low.She was pensive a few minutes, then rousing herself, she saidcheerfully-

　　'But you two are my visitors to-night; I must treat you as such.'She rang her bell.

　　'Barbara,' she said to the servant who answered it, 'I have not yethad tea; bring the tray and place cups for these two young ladies.'

　　And a tray was soon brought. How pretty, to my eyes, did thechina cups and bright teapot look, placed on the little round tablenear the fire! How fragrant was the steam of the beverage, and thescent of the toast! of which, however, I, to my dismay (for I wasbeginning to be hungry), discerned only a very small portion: MissTemple discerned it too.

　　'Barbara,' said she, 'can you not bring a little more bread andbutter? There is not enough for three.'

　　Barbara went out: she returned soon-

　　'Madam, Mrs. Harden says she has sent up the usual quantity.'

　　Mrs. Harden, be it observed, was the housekeeper: a woman after Mr.Brocklehurst's own heart, made up of equal parts of whalebone andiron.

　　'Oh, very well!' returned Miss Temple; 'we must make it do,Barbara, I suppose.' And as the girl withdrew she added, smiling,'Fortunately, I have it in my power to supply deficiencies for thisonce.'

　　Having invited Helen and me to approach the table, and placedbefore each of us a cup of tea with one delicious but thin morsel oftoast, she got up, unlocked a drawer, and taking from it a parcelwrapped in paper, disclosed presently to our eyes a good-sizedseed-cake.

　　'I meant to give each of you some of this to take with you,' saidshe, 'but as there is so little toast, you must have it now,' andshe proceeded to cut slices with a generous hand.

　　We feasted that evening as on nectar and ambrosia; and not theleast delight of the entertainment was the smile of gratification withwhich our hostess regarded us, as we satisfied our famishedappetites on the delicate fare she liberally supplied.

　　Tea over and the tray removed, she again summoned us to the fire;we sat one on each side of her, and now a conversation followedbetween her and Helen, which it was indeed a privilege to beadmitted to hear.

　　Miss Temple had always something of serenity in her air, of statein her mien, of refined propriety in her language, which precludeddeviation into the ardent, the excited, the eager: something whichchastened the pleasure of those who looked on her and listened to her,by a controlling sense of awe; and such was my feeling now: but asto Helen Burns, I was struck with wonder.

　　The refreshing meal, the brilliant fire, the presence andkindness of her beloved instructress, or, perhaps, more than allthese, something in her own unique mind, had roused her powerswithin her. They woke, they kindled: first, they glowed in thebright tint of her cheek, which till this hour I had never seen butpale and bloodless; then they shone in the liquid lustre of hereyes, which had suddenly acquired a beauty more singular than thatof Miss Temple's- a beauty neither of fine colour nor long eyelash,nor pencilled brow, but of meaning, of movement, of radiance. Then hersoul sat on her lips, and language flowed, from what source I cannottell. Has a girl of fourteen a heart large enough, vigorous enough, tohold the swelling spring of pure, full, fervid eloquence? Such was thecharacteristic of Helen's discourse on that, to me, memorable evening;her spirit seemed hastening to live within a very brief span as muchas many live during a protracted existence.

　　They conversed of things I had never heard of; of nations and timespast; of countries far away; of secrets of nature discovered orguessed at: they spoke of books: how many they had read! What storesof knowledge they possessed! Then they seemed so familiar withFrench names and French authors: but my amazement reached its climaxwhen Miss Temple asked Helen if she sometimes snatched a moment torecall the Latin her father had taught her, and taking a book from ashelf, bade her read and construe a page of Virgil; and Helenobeyed, my organ of veneration expanding at every sounding line. Shehad scarcely finished ere the bell announced bedtime! no delay couldbe admitted; Miss Temple embraced us both, saying, as she drew us toher heart-

　　'God bless you, my children!'

　　Helen she held a little longer than me: she let her go morereluctantly; it was Helen her eye followed to the door; it was for hershe a second time breathed a sad sigh; for her she wiped a tear fromher cheek.

　　On reaching the bedroom, we heard the voice of Miss Scatcherd:she was examining drawers; she had just pulled out Helen Burns's,and when we entered Helen was greeted with a sharp reprimand, and toldthat to-morrow she should have half a dozen of untidily foldedarticles pinned to her shoulder.

　　'My things were indeed in shameful disorder,' murmured Helen to me,in a low voice: 'I intended to have arranged them, but I forgot.'

　　Next morning, Miss Scatcherd wrote in conspicuous characters on apiece of pasteboard the word 'Slattern,' and bound it like aphylactery round Helen's large, mild, intelligent, andbenign-looking forehead. She wore it till evening, patient,unresentful, regarding it as a deserved punishment. The moment MissScatcherd withdrew after afternoon school, I ran to Helen, tore itoff, and thrust it into the fire: the fury of which she wasincapable had been burning in my soul all day, and tears, hot andlarge, had continually been scalding my cheek; for the spectacle ofher sad resignation gave me an intolerable pain at the heart.

　　About a week subsequently to the incidents above narrated, MissTemple, who had written to Mr. Lloyd, received his answer: it appearedthat what he said went to corroborate my account. Miss Temple,having assembled the whole school, announced that inquiry had beenmade into the charges alleged against Jane Eyre, and that she was mosthappy to be able to pronounce her completely cleared from everyimputation. The teachers then shook hands with me and kissed me, and amurmur of pleasure ran through the ranks of my companions.

　　Thus relieved of a grievous load, I from that hour set to workafresh, resolved to pioneer my way through every difficulty: Itoiled hard, and my success was proportionate to my efforts; mymemory, not naturally tenacious, improved with practice; exercisesharpened my wits; in a few weeks I was promoted to a higher class; inless than two months I was allowed to commence French and drawing. Ilearned the first two tenses of the verb Etre, and sketched my firstcottage (whose walls, by the bye, outrivalled in slope those of theleaning tower of Pisa), on the same day. That night, on going tobed, I forgot to prepare in imagination the Barmecide supper of hotroast potatoes, or white bread and new milk, with which I was wontto amuse my inward cravings: I feasted instead on the spectacle ofideal drawings, which I saw in the dark; all the work of my own hands:freely pencilled houses and trees, picturesque rocks and ruins,Cuyp-like groups of cattle, sweet paintings of butterflies hoveringover unblown roses, of birds picking at ripe cherries, of wrens' nestsenclosing pearl-like eggs, wreathed about with young ivy sprays. Iexamined, too, in thought, the possibility of my ever being able totranslate currently a certain little French story which Madame Pierrothad that day shown me; nor was that problem solved to mysatisfaction ere I fell sweetly asleep.

　　Well has Solomon said- 'Better is a dinner of herbs where loveis, than a stalled ox and hatred therewith.'

　　I would not now have exchanged Lowood with all its privations forGateshead and its daily luxuries.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER IX
