
　　'Jane, your little feet are bare; lie down and cover yourselfwith my quilt.'

　　I did so: she put her arm over me, and I nestled close to her.After a long silence, she resumed, still whispering-

　　'I am very happy, Jane; and when you hear that I am dead, youmust be sure and not grieve: there is nothing to grieve about. Weall must die one day, and the illness which is removing me is notpainful; it is gentle and gradual: my mind is at rest. I leave noone to regret me much: I have only a father; and he is lately married,and will not miss me. By dying young, I shall escape great sufferings.I had not qualities or talents to make my way very well in theworld: I should have been continually at fault.'

　　'But where are you going to, Helen? Can you see? Do you know?'

　　'I believe; I have faith: I am going to God.'

　　'Where is God? What is God?'

　　'My Maker and yours, who will never destroy what He created. I relyimplicitly on His power, and confide wholly in His goodness: I countthe hours till that eventful one arrives which shall restore me toHim, reveal Him to me.'

　　'You are sure, then, Helen, that there is such a place as heaven,and that our souls can get to it when we die?'

　　'I am sure there is a future state; I believe God is good; I canresign my immortal part to Him without any misgiving. God is myfather; God is my friend: I love Him; I believe He loves me.'

　　'And shall I see you again, Helen, when I die?'

　　'You will come to the same region of happiness: be received bythe same mighty, universal Parent, no doubt, dear Jane.'

　　Again I questioned, but this time only in thought. 'Where is thatregion? Does it exist?' And I clasped my arms closer around Helen; sheseemed dearer to me than ever; I felt as if I could not let her go;I lay with my face hidden on her neck. Presently she said, in thesweetest tone-

　　'How comfortable I am! That last fit of coughing has tired me alittle; I feel as if I could sleep: but don't leave me, Jane; I liketo have you near me.'

　　'I'll stay with you, dear Helen: no one shall take me away.'

　　'Are you warm, darling?'

　　'Yes.'

　　'Good-night, Jane.'

　　'Good-night, Helen.'

　　She kissed me, and I her, and we both soon slumbered.

　　When I awoke it was day: an unusual movement roused me; I lookedup; I was in somebody's arms; the nurse held me; she was carrying methrough the passage back to the dormitory. I was not reprimanded forleaving my bed; people had something else to think about; noexplanation was afforded then to my many questions; but a day or twoafterwards I learned that Miss Temple, on returning to her own room atdawn, had found me laid in the little crib; my face against HelenBurns's shoulder, my arms round her neck. I was asleep, and Helen was-dead.

　　Her grave is in Brocklebridge churchyard: for fifteen years afterher death it was only covered by a grassy mound; but now a grey marbletablet marks the spot, inscribed with her name, and the word'Resurgam.'

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER X--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　HITHERTO I have recorded in detail the events of my insignificantexistence: to the first ten years of my life I have given almost asmany chapters. But this is not to be a regular autobiography: I amonly bound to invoke Memory where I know her responses will possesssome degree of interest; therefore I now pass a space of eight yearsalmost in silence: a few lines only are necessary to keep up the linksof connection.

　　When the typhus fever had fulfilled its mission of devastation atLowood, it gradually disappeared from thence; but not till itsvirulence and the number of its victims had drawn public attentionon the school. Inquiry was made into the origin of the scourge, and bydegrees various facts came out which excited public indignation in ahigh degree. The unhealthy nature of the site; the quantity andquality of the children's food; the brackish, fetid water used inits preparation; the pupils' wretched clothing and accommodations- allthese things were discovered, and the discovery produced a resultmortifying to Mr. Brocklehurst, but beneficial to the institution.

　　Several wealthy and benevolent individuals in the county subscribedlargely for the erection of a more convenient building in a bettersituation; new regulations were made; improvements in diet andclothing introduced; the funds of the school were intrusted to themanagement of a committee. Mr. Brocklehurst, who, from his wealthand family connections, could not be overlooked, still retained thepost of treasurer; but he was aided in the discharge of his dutiesby gentlemen of rather more enlarged and sympathising minds: hisoffice of inspector, too, was shared by those who knew how tocombine reason with strictness, comfort with economy, compassionwith uprightness. The school, thus improved, became in time a trulyuseful and noble institution. I remained an inmate of its walls, afterits regeneration, for eight years: six as pupil, and two as teacher;and in both capacities I bear my testimony to its value andimportance.

　　During these eight years my life was uniform: but not unhappy,because it was not inactive. I had the means of an excellent educationplaced within my reach; a fondness for some of my studies, and adesire to excel in all, together with a great delight in pleasing myteachers, especially such as I loved, urged me on: I availed myselffully of the advantages offered me. In time I rose to be the firstgirl of the first class; then I was invested with the office ofteacher; which I discharged with zeal for two years: but at the end ofthat time I altered.

　　Miss Temple, through all changes, had thus far continuedsuperintendent of the seminary: to her instruction I owed the bestpart of my acquirements; her friendship and society had been mycontinual solace; she had stood me in the stead of mother,governess, and, latterly, companion. At this period she married,removed with her husband (a clergyman, an excellent man, almost worthyof such a wife) to a distant county, and consequently was lost to me.

　　From the day she left I was no longer the same: with her was goneevery settled feeling, every association that had made Lowood insome degree a home to me. I had imbibed from her something of hernature and much of her habits: more harmonious thoughts: what seemedbetter regulated feelings had become the inmates of my mind. I hadgiven in allegiance to duty and order; I was quiet; I believed I wascontent: to the eyes of others, usually even to my own, I appeared adisciplined and subdued character.

　　But destiny, in the shape of the Rev. Mr. Nasmyth, came betweenme and Miss Temple: I saw her in her travelling dress step into apost-chaise, shortly after the marriage ceremony; I watched the chaisemount the hill and disappear beyond its brow; and then retired to myown room, and there spent in solitude the greatest part of thehalf-holiday granted in honour of the occasion.

　　I walked about the chamber most of the time. I imagined myself onlyto be regretting my loss, and thinking how to repair it; but when myreflections were concluded, and I looked up and found that theafternoon was gone, and evening far advanced, another discovery dawnedon me, namely, that in the interval I had undergone a transformingprocess; that my mind had put off all it had borrowed of MissTemple- or rather that she had taken with her the serene atmosphereI had been breathing in her vicinity- and that now I was left in mynatural element, and beginning to feel the stirring of old emotions.It did not seem as if a prop were withdrawn, but rather as if a motivewere gone: it was not the power to be tranquil which had failed me,but the reason for tranquillity was no more. My world had for someyears been in Lowood: my experience had been of its rules and systems;now I remembered that the real world was wide, and that a varied fieldof hopes and fears, of sensations and excitements, awaited those whohad courage to go forth into its expanse, to seek real knowledge oflife amidst its perils.

　　I went to my window, opened it, and looked out. There were thetwo wings of the building; there was the garden; there were the skirtsof Lowood; there was the hilly horizon. My eye passed all otherobjects to rest on those most remote, the blue peaks; it was those Ilonged to surmount; all within their boundary of rock and heath seemedprison-ground, exile limits. I traced the white road winding round thebase of one mountain, and vanishing in a gorge between two; how Ilonged to follow it farther! I recalled the time when I hadtravelled that very road in a coach; I remembered descending that hillat twilight; an age seemed to have elapsed since the day which broughtme first to Lowood, and I had never quitted it since. My vacations hadall been spent at school: Mrs. Reed had never sent for me toGateshead; neither she nor any of her family had ever been to visitme. I had had no communication by letter or message with the outerworld: school-rules, school-duties, school-habits and notions, andvoices, and faces, and phrases, and costumes, and preferences, andantipathies- such was what I knew of existence. And now I felt that itwas not enough; I tired of the routine of eight years in oneafternoon. I desired liberty; for liberty I gasped; for liberty Iuttered a prayer; it seemed scattered on the wind then faintlyblowing. I abandoned it and framed a humbler supplication; for change,stimulus: that petition, too, seemed swept off into vague space:'Then,' I cried, half desperate, 'grant me at least a new servitude!'

　　Here a bell, ringing the hour of supper, called me downstairs.

　　I was not free to resume the interrupted chain of my reflectionstill bedtime: even then a teacher who occupied the same room with mekept me from the subject to which I longed to recur, by a prolongedeffusion of small talk. How I wished sleep would silence her. Itseemed as if, could I but go back to the idea which had last enteredmy mind as I stood at the window, some inventive suggestion would risefor my relief.

　　Miss Gryce snored at last; she was a heavy Welsh-woman, and tillnow her habitual nasal strains had never been regarded by me in anyother light than as a nuisance; to-night I hailed the first deep noteswith satisfaction; I was debarrassed of interruption; myhalf-effaced thought instantly revived.

　　'A new servitude! There is something in that,' I soliloquised(mentally, be it understood; I did not talk aloud). 'I know thereis, because it does not sound too sweet; it is not like such wordsas Liberty, Excitement, Enjoyment: delightful sounds truly; but nomore than sounds for me; and so hollow and fleeting that it is merewaste of time to listen to them. But Servitude! That must be matter offact. Any one may serve: I have served here eight years; now all Iwant is to serve elsewhere. Can I not get so much of my own will? Isnot the thing feasible? Yes- yes- the end is not so difficult; if Ihad only a brain active enough to ferret out the means of attainingit.'

　　I sat up in bed by way of arousing this said brain: it was a chillynight; I covered my shoulders with a shawl, and then I proceeded tothink again with all my might.

　　'What do I want? A new place, in a new house, amongst new faces,under new circumstances: I want this because it is of no use wantinganything better. How do people do to get a new place? They apply tofriends, I suppose: I have no friends. There are many others whohave no friends, who must look about for themselves and be their ownhelpers; and what is their resource?'

　　I could not tell: nothing answered me; I then ordered my brain tofind a response, and quickly. It worked and worked faster: I feltthe pulses throb in my head and temples; but for nearly an hour itworked in chaos; and no result came of its efforts. Feverish with vainlabour, I got up and took a turn in the room; undrew the curtain,noted a star or two, shivered with cold, and again crept to bed.

　　A kind fairy, in my absence, had surely dropped the requiredsuggestion on my pillow; for as I lay down, it came quietly andnaturally to my mind:- 'Those who want situations advertise; you

　　'How? I know nothing about advertising.'

　　Replies rose smooth and prompt now:-

　　'You must enclose the advertisement and the money to pay for itunder a cover directed to the editor of the Herald; you must put it,the first opportunity you have, into the post at Lowton; answersmust be addressed to J. E., at the post-office there; you can go andinquire in about a week after you send your letter, if any are come,and act accordingly.'

　　This scheme I went over twice, thrice; it was then digested in mymind; I had it in a clear practical form: I felt satisfied, and fellasleep.

　　With earliest day, I was up: I had my advertisement written,enclosed, and directed before the bell rang to rouse the school; itran thus:-

　　'A young lady accustomed to tuition' (had I not been a teachertwo years?) 'is desirous of meeting with a situation in a privatefamily where the children are under fourteen' (I thought that as I wasbarely eighteen, it would not do to undertake the guidance of pupilsnearer my own age). 'She is qualified to teach the usual branches of agood English education, together with French, Drawing, and Music'(in those days, reader, this now narrow catalogue ofaccomplishments, would have been held tolerably comprehensive).

　　This document remained locked in my drawer all day: after tea, Iasked leave of the new superintendent to go to Lowton, in order toperform some small commissions for myself and one or two of myfellow-teachers; permission was readily granted; I went. It was a walkof two miles, and the evening was wet, but the days were still long; Ivisited a shop or two, slipped the letter into the post-office, andcame back through heavy rain, with streaming garments, but with arelieved heart.

　　The succeeding week seemed long: it came to an end at last,however, like all sublunary things, and once more, towards the closeof a pleasant autumn day, I found myself afoot on the road toLowton. A picturesque track it was, by the way; lying along the sideof the beck and through the sweetest curves of the dale: but thatday I thought more of the letters, that might or might not be awaitingme at the little burgh whither I was bound, than of the charms oflea and water.

　　My ostensible errand on this occasion was to get measured for apair of shoes; so I discharged that business first, and when it wasdone, I stepped across the clean and quiet little street from theshoemaker's to the post-office: it was kept by an old dame, who worehorn spectacles on her nose, and black mittens on her hands.

　　'Are there any letters for J. E.?' I asked.

　　She peered at me over her spectacles, and then she opened adrawer and fumbled among its contents for a long time, so long that myhopes began to falter. At last, having held a document before herglasses for nearly five minutes, she presented it across thecounter, accompanying the act by another inquisitive and mistrustfulglance- it was for J. E.

　　'Is there only one?' I demanded.

　　'There are no more,' said she; and I put it in my pocket and turnedmy face homeward: I could not open it then; rules obliged me to beback by eight, and it was already half-past seven.

　　Various duties awaited me on my arrival: I had to sit with thegirls during their hour of study; then it was my turn to read prayers;to see them to bed: afterwards I supped with the other teachers.Even when we finally retired for the night, the inevitable MissGryce was still my companion: we had only a short end of candle in ourcandlestick, and I dreaded lest she should talk till it was allburnt out; fortunately, however, the heavy supper she had eatenproduced a soporific effect: she was already snoring before I hadfinished undressing. There still remained an inch of candle: I nowtook out my letter; the seal was an initial F.; I broke it; thecontents were brief.Thursday, possesses the acquirements mentioned, and if she is in aposition to give satisfactory references as to character andcompetency, a situation can be offered her where there is but onepupil, a little girl, under ten years of age; and where the salaryis thirty pounds per annum. J. E. is requested to send references,name, address, and all particulars to the direction:-

　　I examined the document long: the writing was old-fashioned andrather uncertain, like that of an elderly lady. This circumstancewas satisfactory: a private fear had haunted me, that in thus actingfor myself, and by my own guidance, I ran the risk of getting intosome scrape; and, above all things, I wished the result of myendeavours to be respectable, proper, en regle. I now felt that anelderly lady was no bad ingredient in the business I had on hand. Mrs.Fairfax! I saw her in a black gown and widow's cap; frigid, perhaps,but not uncivil: a model of elderly English respectability.Thornfield! that, doubtless, was the name of her house: a neat orderlyspot, I was sure; though I failed in my efforts to conceive arecollections of the map of England; yes, I saw it; both the shire andcounty where I now resided: that was a recommendation to me. Ilonged to go where there was life and movement: Millcote was a largedoubtless: so much the better; it would be a complete change at least.Not that my fancy was much captivated by the idea of long chimneys andclouds of smoke- 'but,' I argued, 'Thornfield will, probably, be agood way from the town.'

　　Here the socket of the candle dropped, and the wick went out.

　　Next day new steps were to be taken; my plans could no longer beconfined to my own breast; I must impart them in order to achievetheir success. Having sought and obtained an audience of thesuperintendent during the noontide recreation, I told her I had aprospect of getting a new situation where the salary would be doublewhat I now received (for at Lowood I only got L15 per annum); andrequested she would break the matter for me to Mr. Brocklehurst, orsome of the committee, and ascertain whether they would permit me tomention them as references. She obligingly consented to act asmediatrix in the matter. The next day she laid the affair before Mr.Brocklehurst, who said that Mrs. Reed must be written to, as she wasmy natural guardian. A note was accordingly addressed to that lady,who returned for answer, that 'I might do as I pleased: she had longrelinquished all interference in my affairs.' This note went the roundof the committee, and at last, after what appeared to me mosttedious delay, formal leave was given me to better my condition if Icould; and an assurance added, that as I had always conducted myselfwell, both as teacher and pupil, at Lowood, a testimonial of characterand capacity, signed by the inspectors of that institution, shouldforthwith be furnished me.

　　This testimonial I accordingly received in about a month, forwardeda copy of it to Mrs. Fairfax, and got that lady's reply, statingthat she was satisfied, and fixing that day fortnight as the periodfor my assuming the post of governess in her house.

　　I now busied myself in preparations: the fortnight passedrapidly. I had not a very large wardrobe, though it was adequate to mywants; and the last day sufficed to pack my trunk,- the same I hadbrought with me eight years ago from Gateshead.

　　The box was corded, the card nailed on. In half an hour the carrierwas to call for it to take it to Lowton, whither I myself was torepair at an early hour the next morning to meet the coach. I hadbrushed my black stuff travelling-dress, prepared my bonnet, gloves,and muff; sought in all my drawers to see that no article was leftbehind; and now having nothing more to do, I sat down and tried torest. I could not; though I had been on foot all day, I could notnow repose an instant; I was too much excited. A phase of my lifewas closing tonight, a new one opening to-morrow: impossible toslumber in the interval; I must watch feverishly while the changewas being accomplished.

　　'Miss,' said a servant who met me in the lobby, where I waswandering like a troubled spirit, 'a person below wishes to see you.'

　　'The carrier, no doubt,' I thought, and ran downstairs withoutinquiry. I was passing the back-parlour or teachers' sitting-room, thedoor of which was half open, to go to the kitchen, when some one ranout-

　　'It's her, I am sure!- I could have told her anywhere!' cried theindividual who stopped my progress and took my hand.

　　I looked: I saw a woman attired like a well-dressed servant,matronly, yet still young; very good-looking, with black hair andeyes, and lively complexion.

　　'Well, who is it?' she asked, in a voice and with a smile I halfrecognised; 'you've not quite forgotten me, I think, Miss Jane?'

　　In another second I was embracing and kissing her rapturously:'Bessie! Bessie! Bessie!' that was all I said; whereat she halflaughed, half cried, and we both went into the parlour. By the firestood a little fellow of three years old, in plaid frock and trousers.

　　'That is my little boy,' said Bessie directly.

　　'Then you are married, Bessie?'

　　'Yes; nearly five years since to Robert Leaven, the coachman; andI've a little girl besides Bobby there, that I've christened Jane.'

　　'And you don't live at Gateshead?'

　　'I live at the lodge: the old porter has left.'

　　'Well, and how do they all get on? Tell me everything about them,Bessie: but sit down first; and, Bobby, come and sit on my knee,will you?' but Bobby preferred sidling over to his mother.

　　'You're not grown so very tall, Miss Jane, nor so very stout,'continued Mrs. Leaven. 'I daresay they've not kept you too well atschool: Miss Reed is the head and shoulders taller than you are; andMiss Georgiana would make two of you in breadth.'

　　'Georgiana is handsome, I suppose, Bessie?'

　　'Very. She went up to London last winter with her mama, and thereeverybody admired her, and a young lord fell in love with her: but hisrelations were against the match; and- what do you think?- he and MissGeorgiana made it up to run away; but they were found out and stopped.It was Miss Reed that found them out: I believe she was envious; andnow she and her sister lead a cat and dog life together; they arealways quarrelling.'

　　'Well, and what of John Reed?'

　　'Oh, he is not doing so well as his mama could wish. He went tocollege, and he got- plucked, I think they call it: and then hisuncles wanted him to be a barrister, and study the law: but he is sucha dissipated young man, they will never make much of him, I think.'

　　'What does he look like?'

　　'He is very tall: some people call him a fine-looking young man;but he has such thick lips.'

　　'And Mrs. Reed?'

　　'Missis looks stout and well enough in the face, but I thinkshe's not quite easy in her mind: Mr. John's conduct does not pleaseher- he spends a deal of money.'

　　'Did she send you here, Bessie?'

　　'No, indeed: but I have long wanted to see you, and when I heardthat there had been a letter from you, and that you were going toanother part of the country, I thought I'd just set off, and get alook at you before you were quite out of my reach.'

　　'I am afraid you are disappointed in me, Bessie.' I said thislaughing: I perceived that Bessie's glance, though it expressedregard, did in no shape denote admiration.

　　'No, Miss Jane, not exactly: you are genteel enough; you looklike a lady, and it is as much as ever I expected of you: you wereno beauty as a child.'

　　I smiled at Bessie's frank answer: I felt that it was correct,but I confess I was not quite indifferent to its import: at eighteenmost people wish to please, and the conviction that they have not anexterior likely to second that desire brings anything butgratification.

　　'I daresay you are clever, though,' continued Bessie, by way ofsolace. 'What can you do? Can you play on the piano?'

　　'A little.'

　　There was one in the room; Bessie went and opened it, and thenasked me to sit down and give her a tune: I played a waltz or two, andshe was charmed.

　　'The Miss Reeds could not play as well!' said she exultingly. 'Ialways said you would surpass them in learning: and can you draw?'

　　'That is one of my paintings over the chimney-piece.' It was alandscape in water colours, of which I had made a present to thesuperintendent, in acknowledgment of her obliging mediation with thecommittee on my behalf, and which she had framed and glazed.

　　'Well, that is beautiful, Miss Jane! It is as fine a picture as anyMiss Reed's drawing-master could paint, let alone the young ladiesthemselves, who could not come near it: and have you learnt French?'

　　'Yes, Bessie, I can both read it and speak it.'

　　'And you can work on muslin and canvas?'

　　'I can.'

　　'Oh, you are quite a lady, Miss Jane! I knew you would be: you willget on whether your relations notice you or not. There was something Iwanted to ask you. Have you ever heard anything from your father'skinsfolk, the Eyres?'

　　'Never in my life.'

　　'Well, you know, Missis always said they were poor and quitedespicable: and they may be poor; but I believe they are as muchgentry as the Reeds are; for one day, nearly seven years ago, a Mr.Eyre came to Gateshead and wanted to see you; Missis said you wereat school fifty miles off; he seemed so much disappointed, for hecould not stay: he was going on a voyage to a foreign country, and theship was to sail from London in a day or two. He looked quite agentleman, and I believe he was your father's brother.'

　　'What foreign country was he going to, Bessie?'

　　'An island thousands of miles off, where they make wine- the butlerdid tell me-'

　　'Madeira?' I suggested.

　　'Yes, that is it- that is the very word.'

　　'So he went?'

　　'Yes; he did not stay many minutes in the house: Missis was veryhigh with him; she called him afterwards a "sneaking tradesman." MyRobert believes he was a wine-merchant.'

　　'Very likely,' I returned; 'or perhaps clerk or agent to awine-merchant.'

　　Bessie and I conversed about old times an hour longer, and then shewas obliged to leave me: I saw her again for a few minutes the nextmorning at Lowton, while I was waiting for the coach. We partedfinally at the door of the Brocklehurst Arms there, each went herseparate way; she set off for the brow of Lowood Fell to meet theconveyance which was to take her back to Gateshead, I mounted thevehicle which was to bear me to new duties and a new life in theunknown environs of Millcote.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER XI--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　A NEW chapter in a novel is something like a new scene in a play;and when I draw up the curtain this time, reader, you must fancy yousee a room in the George Inn at Millcote, with such large figuredpapering on the walls as inn rooms have; such a carpet, suchfurniture, such ornaments on the mantel-piece, such prints,including a portrait of George the Third, and another of the Prince ofWales, and a representation of the death of Wolfe. All this is visibleto you by the light of an oil lamp hanging from the ceiling, and bythat of an excellent fire, near which I sit in my cloak and bonnet; mymuff and umbrella lie on the table, and I am warming away the numbnessand chill contracted by sixteen hours' exposure to the rawness of anOctober day: I left Lowton at four o'clock A.M., and the Millcote townclock is now just striking eight.

　　Reader, though I look comfortably accommodated, I am not verytranquil in my mind. I thought when the coach stopped here there wouldbe some one to meet me; I looked anxiously round as I descended thewooden steps the 'boots' placed for my convenience, expecting tohear my name pronounced, and to see some description of carriagewaiting to convey me to Thornfield. Nothing of the sort was visible;and when I asked a waiter if any one had been to inquire after aMiss Eyre, I was answered in the negative: so I had no resource but torequest to be shown into a private room: and here I am waiting,while all sorts of doubts and fears are troubling my thoughts.

　　It is a very strange sensation to inexperienced youth to feelitself quite alone in the world, cut adrift from every connection,uncertain whether the port to which it is bound can be reached, andprevented by many impediments from returning to that it has quitted.The charm of adventure sweetens that sensation, the glow of pridewarms it; but then the throb of fear disturbs it; and fear with mebecame predominant when half an hour elapsed and still I was alone.I bethought myself to ring the bell.

　　'Is there a place in this neighbourhood called Thornfield?' I askedof the waiter who answered the summons.

　　'Thornfield? I don't know, ma'am; I'll inquire at the bar.' Hevanished, but reappeared instantly-

　　'Is your name Eyre, Miss?'

　　'Yes.'

　　'Person here waiting for you.'

　　I jumped up, took my muff and umbrella, and hastened into theinn-passage: a man was standing by the open door, and in thelamp-lit street I dimly saw a one-horse conveyance.

　　'This will be your luggage, I suppose?' said the man ratherabruptly when he saw me, pointing to my trunk in the passage.

　　'Yes.' He hoisted it on to the vehicle, which was a sort of car,and then I got in; before he shut me up, I asked him how far it was toThornfield.

　　'A matter of six miles.'

　　'How long shall we be before we get there?'

　　'Happen an hour and a half.'

　　He fastened the car door, climbed to his own seat outside, and weset off. Our progress was leisurely, and gave me ample time toreflect; I was content to be at length so near the end of myjourney; and as I leaned back in the comfortable though not elegantconveyance, I meditated much at my ease.

　　'I suppose,' thought I, 'judging from the plainness of theservant and carriage, Mrs. Fairfax is not a very dashing person: somuch the better; I never lived amongst fine people but once, and I wasvery miserable with them. I wonder if she lives alone except thislittle girl; if so, and if she is in any degree amiable, I shallsurely be able to get on with her; I will do my best; it is a pitythat doing one's best does not always answer. At Lowood, indeed, Itook that resolution, kept it, and succeeded in pleasing; but withMrs. Reed, I remember my best was always spurned with scorn. I prayGod Mrs. Fairfax may not turn out a second Mrs. Reed; but if she does,I am not bound to stay with her! let the worst come to the worst, Ican advertise again. How far are we on our road now, I wonder?'

　　I let down the window and looked out; Millcote was behind us;judging by the number of its lights, it seemed a place of considerablemagnitude, much larger than Lowton. We were now, as far as I couldsee, on a sort of common; but there were houses scattered all over thedistrict; I felt we were in a different region to Lowood, morepopulous, less picturesque; more stirring, less romantic.

　　The roads were heavy, the night misty; my conductor let his horsewalk all the way, and the hour and a half extended, I verilybelieve, to two hours; at last he turned in his seat and said-

　　'You're noan so far fro' Thornfield now.'

　　Again I looked out: we were passing a church; I saw its low broadtower against the sky, and its bell was tolling a quarter; I saw anarrow galaxy of lights too, on a hillside, marking a village orhamlet. About ten minutes after, the driver got down and opened a pairof gates: we passed through, and they clashed to behind us. We nowslowly ascended a drive, and came upon the long front of a house:candlelight gleamed from one curtained bow-window; all the rest weredark. The car stopped at the front door; it was opened by amaid-servant; I alighted and went in.

　　'Will you walk this way, ma'am?' said the girl; and I followedher across a square hall with high doors all round: she ushered meinto a room whose double illumination of fire and candle at firstdazzled me, contrasting as it did with the darkness to which my eyeshad been for two hours inured; when I could see, however, a cosy andagreeable picture presented itself to my view.

　　A snug small room; a round table by a cheerful fire; an arm-chairhigh-backed and old-fashioned, wherein sat the neatest imaginablelittle elderly lady, in widow's cap, black silk gown, and snowy muslinapron; exactly like what I had fancied Mrs. Fairfax, only less statelyand milder looking. She was occupied in knitting; a large cat satdemurely at her feet; nothing in short was wanting to complete thebeau-ideal of domestic comfort. A more reassuring introduction for anew governess could scarcely be conceived; there was no grandeur tooverwhelm, no stateliness to embarrass; and then, as I entered, theold lady got up and promptly and kindly came forward to meet me.

　　'How do you do, my dear? I am afraid you have had a tedious ride;John drives so slowly; you must be cold, come to the fire.'

　　'Mrs. Fairfax, I suppose?' said I.

　　'Yes, you are right: do sit down.'

　　She conducted me to her own chair, and then began to remove myshawl and untie my bonnet-strings; I begged she would not give herselfso much trouble.

　　'Oh, it is no trouble; I daresay your own hands are almost numbedwith cold. Leah, make a little hot negus and cut a sandwich or two:here are the keys of the storeroom.'

　　And she produced from her pocket a most housewifely bunch ofkeys, and delivered them to the servant.

　　'Now, then, draw nearer to the fire,' she continued. 'You'vebrought your luggage with you, haven't you, my dear?'

　　'Yes, ma'am.'

　　'I'll see it carried into your room,' she said, and bustled out.

　　'She treats me like a visitor,' thought I. 'I little expectedsuch a reception; I anticipated only coldness and stiffness: this isnot like what I have heard of the treatment of governesses; but I mustnot exult too soon.'

　　She returned; with her own hands cleared her knitting apparatus anda book or two from the table, to make room for the tray which Leah nowbrought, and then herself handed me the refreshments. I felt ratherconfused at being the object of more attention than I had everbefore received, and, that too, shown by my employer and superior; butas she did not herself seem to consider she was doing anything outof her place, I thought it better to take her civilities quietly.

　　'Shall I have the pleasure of seeing Miss Fairfax to-night?' Iasked, when I had partaken of what she offered me.

　　'What did you say, my dear? I am a little deaf,' returned thegood lady, approaching her ear to my mouth.

　　I repeated the question more distinctly.

　　'Miss Fairfax? Oh, you mean Miss Varens! Varens is the name of yourfuture pupil.'

　　'Indeed! Then she is not your daughter?'

　　'No,- I have no family.'

　　I should have followed up my first inquiry, by asking in what wayMiss Varens was connected with her; but I recollected it was notpolite to ask too many questions: besides, I was sure to hear in time.

　　'I am so glad,' she continued, as she sat down opposite to me,and took the cat on her knee; 'I am so glad you are come; it will bequite pleasant living here now with a companion. To be sure it ispleasant at any time; for Thornfield is a fine old hall, ratherneglected of late years perhaps, but still it is a respectableplace; yet you know in winter-time one feels dreary quite alone in thebest quarters. I say alone- Leah is a nice girl to be sure, and Johnand his wife are very decent people; but then you see they are onlyservants, and one can't converse with them on terms of equality: onemust keep them at due distance, for fear of losing one's authority.I'm sure last winter (it was a very severe one, if you recollect,and when it did not snow, it rained and blew), not a creature butthe butcher and postman came to the house, from November tillFebruary; and I really got quite melancholy with sitting night afternight alone; I had Leah in to read to me sometimes; but I don'tthink the poor girl liked the task much: she felt it confining. Inspring and summer one got on better: sunshine and long days makesuch a difference; and then, just at the commencement of thisautumn, little Adela Varens came and her nurse: a child makes ahouse alive all at once; and now you are here I shall be quite gay.'

　　My heart really warmed to the worthy lady as I heard her talk;and I drew my chair a little nearer to her, and expressed my sincerewish that she might find my company as agreeable as she anticipated.

　　'But I'll not keep you sitting up late to-night,' said she; 'itis on the stroke of twelve now, and you have been travelling allday: you must feel tired. If you have got your feet well warmed,I'll show you your bedroom. I've had the room next to mine preparedfor you; it is only a small apartment, but I thought you would like itbetter than one of the large front chambers: to be sure they havefiner furniture, but they are so dreary and solitary, I never sleep inthem myself.'

　　I thanked her for her considerate choice, and as I really feltfatigued with my long journey, expressed my readiness to retire. Shetook her candle, and I followed her from the room. First she went tosee if the hall-door was fastened; having taken the key from the lock,she led the way upstairs. The steps and banisters were of oak; thestaircase window was high and latticed; both it and the long galleryinto which the bedroom doors opened looked as if they belonged to achurch rather than a house. A very chill and vault-like air pervadedthe stairs and gallery, suggesting cheerless ideas of space andsolitude; and I was glad, when finally ushered into my chamber, tofind it of small dimensions, and furnished in ordinary, modern style.

　　When Mrs. Fairfax had bidden me a kind good-night, and I hadfastened my door, gazed leisurely round, and in some measure effacedthe eerie impression made by that wide hall, that dark and spaciousstaircase, and that long, cold gallery, by the livelier aspect of mylittle room, I remembered that, after a day of bodily fatigue andmental anxiety, I was now at last in safe haven. The impulse ofgratitude swelled my heart, and I knelt down at the bedside, andoffered up thanks where thanks were due; not forgetting, ere I rose,to implore aid on my further path, and the power of meriting thekindness which seemed so frankly offered me before it was earned. Mycouch had no thorns in it that night; my solitary room no fears. Atonce weary and content, I slept soon and soundly: when I awoke itwas broad day.

　　The chamber looked such a bright little place to me as the sunshone in between the gay blue chintz window curtains, showingpapered walls and a carpeted floor, so unlike the bare planks andstained plaster of Lowood, that my spirits rose at the view. Externalshave a great effect on the young: I thought that a fairer era oflife was beginning for me- one that was to have its flowers andpleasures, as well as its thorns and toils. My faculties, roused bythe change of scene, the new field offered to hope, seemed allastir. I cannot precisely define what they expected, but it wassomething pleasant: not perhaps that day or that month, but at anindefinite future period.

　　I rose; I dressed myself with care: obliged to be plain- for Ihad no article of attire that was not made with extreme simplicity-I was still by nature solicitous to be neat. It was not my habit to bedisregardful of appearance or careless of the impression I made: onthe contrary, I ever wished to look as well as I could, and toplease as much as my want of beauty would permit. I sometimesregretted that I was not handsomer; I sometimes wished to have rosycheeks, a straight nose, and small cherry mouth; I desired to be tall,stately, and finely developed in figure; I felt it a misfortune that Iwas so little, so pale, and had features so irregular and so marked.And why had I these aspirations and these regrets? It would bedifficult to say: I could not then distinctly say it to myself; yetI had a reason, and a logical, natural reason too. However, when I hadbrushed my hair very smooth, and put on my black frock- which,Quakerlike as it was, at least had the merit of fitting to a nicety-and adjusted my clean white tucker, I thought I should dorespectably enough to appear before Mrs. Fairfax, and that my newpupil would not at least recoil from me with antipathy. Havingopened my chamber window, and seen that I left all things straight andneat on the toilet table, I ventured forth.

　　Traversing the long and matted gallery, I descended the slipperysteps of oak; then I gained the hall: I halted there a minute; Ilooked at some pictures on the walls (one, I remember, represented agrim man in a cuirass, and one a lady with powdered hair and a pearlnecklace), at a bronze lamp pendent from the ceiling, at a great clockwhose case was of oak curiously carved, and ebon black with time andrubbing. Everything appeared very stately and imposing to me; but thenI was so little accustomed to grandeur. The hall-door, which washalf of glass, stood open; I stepped over the threshold. It was a fineautumn morning; the early sun shone serenely on embrowned groves andstill green fields; advancing on to the lawn, I looked up and surveyedthe front of the mansion. It was three storeys high, of proportionsnot vast, though considerable: a gentleman's manor-house, not anobleman's seat: battlements round the top gave it a picturesque look.Its grey front stood out well from the background of a rookery,whose cawing tenants were now on the wing: they flew over the lawn andgrounds to alight in a great meadow, from which these were separatedby a sunk fence, and where an array of mighty old thorn trees, strong,knotty, and broad as oaks, at once explained the etymology of themansion's designation. Farther off were hills: not so lofty as thoseround Lowood, nor so craggy, nor so like barriers of separation fromthe living world; but yet quiet and lonely hills enough, and seemingto embrace Thornfield with a seclusion I had not expected to findexistent so near the stirring locality of Millcote. A little hamlet,whose roofs were blent with trees, straggled up the side of one ofthese hills; the church of the district stood nearer Thornfield: itsold tower-top looked over a knoll between the house and gates.

　　I was yet enjoying the calm prospect and pleasant fresh air, yetlistening with delight to the cawing of the rooks, yet surveying thewide, hoary front of the hall, and thinking what a great place itwas for one lonely little dame like Mrs. Fairfax to inhabit, when thatlady appeared at the door.

　　'What! out already?' said she. 'I see you are an early riser.' Iwent up to her, and was received with an affable kiss and shake of thehand.

　　'How do you like Thornfield?' she asked. I told her I liked it verymuch.

　　'Yes,' she said, 'it is a pretty place; but I fear it will begetting out of order, unless Mr. Rochester should take it into hishead to come and reside here permanently; or, at least, visit itrather oftener: great houses and fine grounds require the presenceof the proprietor.'

　　'Mr. Rochester!' I exclaimed. 'Who is he?'

　　'The owner of Thornfield,' she responded quietly. 'Did you not knowhe was called Rochester?'

　　Of course I did not- I had never heard of him before; but the oldlady seemed to regard his existence as a universally understoodfact, with which everybody must be acquainted by instinct.

　　'I thought,' I continued, 'Thornfield belonged to you.'

　　'To me? Bless you, child; what an idea! To me! I am only thehousekeeper- the manager. To be sure I am distantly related to theRochesters by the mother's side, or at least my husband was; he wasa clergyman, incumbent of Hay- that little village yonder on the hill-and that church near the gates was his. The present Mr. Rochester'smother was a Fairfax, second cousin to my husband: but I never presumeon the connection- in fact, it is nothing to me; I consider myselfquite in the light of an ordinary housekeeper: my employer is alwayscivil, and I expect nothing more.'

　　'And the little girl- my pupil!'

　　'She is Mr. Rochester's ward; he commissioned me to find abelieve. Here she comes, with her "bonne," as she calls her nurse.'The enigma then was explained: this affable and kind little widowwas no great dame; but a dependant like myself. I did not like her theworse for that; on the contrary, I felt better pleased than ever.The equality between her and me was real; not the mere result ofcondescension on her part: so much the better- my position was all thefreer.

　　As I was meditating on this discovery, a little girl, followed byher attendant, came running up the lawn. I looked at my pupil, who didnot at first appear to notice me: she was quite a child, perhaps sevenor eight years old, slightly built, with a pale, small-featuredface, and a redundancy of hair falling in curls to her waist.

　　'Good morning, Miss Adela,' said Mrs. Fairfax. 'Come and speak tothe lady who is to teach you, and to make you a clever woman someday.' She approached.

　　'C'est la ma gouvernante!' said she, pointing to me, and addressingher nurse; who answered-

　　'Mais oui, certainement.'

　　'Are they foreigners?' I inquired, amazed at hearing the Frenchlanguage.

　　'The nurse is a foreigner, and Adela was born on the Continent;and, I believe, never left it till within six months ago. When shefirst came here she could speak no English; now she can make shiftto talk it a little: I don't understand her, she mixes it so withFrench; but you will make out her meaning very well, I daresay.'

　　Fortunately I had had the advantage of being taught French by aFrench lady; and as I had always made a point of conversing withMadame Pierrot as often as I could, and had besides, during the lastseven years, learnt a portion of French by heart daily- applyingmyself to take pains with my accent, and imitating as closely aspossible the pronunciation of my teacher, I had acquired a certaindegree of readiness and correctness in the language, and was notlikely to be much at a loss with Mademoiselle Adela. She came andshook hands with me when she heard that I was her governess; and asI led her in to breakfast, I addressed some phrases to her in herown tongue: she replied briefly at first, but after we were seatedat the table, and she had examined me some ten minutes with herlarge hazel eyes, she suddenly commenced chattering fluently.

　　'Ah!' cried she, in French, 'you speak my language as well as Mr.Rochester does: I can talk to you as I can to him, and so canSophie. She will be glad: nobody here understands her: MadameFairfax is all English. Sophie is my nurse; she came with me overthe sea in a great ship with a chimney that smoked- how it did smoke!-and I was sick, and so was Sophie, and so was Mr. Rochester. Mr.Rochester lay down on a sofa in a pretty room called the salon, andSophie and I had little beds in another place. I nearly fell out ofmine; it was like a shelf. And Mademoiselle- what is your name?'

　　'Eyre- Jane Eyre.'

　　'Aire? Bah! I cannot say it. Well, our ship stopped in the morning,before it was quite daylight, at a great city- a huge city, withvery dark houses and all smoky; not at all like the pretty cleantown I came from; and Mr. Rochester carried me in his arms over aplank to the land, and Sophie came after, and we all got into a coach,which took us to a beautiful large house, larger than this andfiner, called an hotel. We stayed there nearly a week: I and Sophieused to walk every day in a great green place full of trees, calledthe Park; and there were many children there besides me, and a pondwith beautiful birds in it, that I fed with crumbs.'

　　'Can you understand her when she runs on so fast?' asked Mrs.Fairfax.

　　I understood her very well, for I had been accustomed to the fluenttongue of Madame Pierrot.

　　'I wish,' continued the good lady, 'you would ask her a question ortwo about her parents: I wonder if she remembers them?'

　　'Adele,' I inquired, 'with whom did you live when you were inthat pretty clean town you spoke of?'

　　'I lived long ago with mama; but she is gone to the Holy Virgin.Mama used to teach me to dance and sing, and to say verses. A greatmany gentlemen and ladies came to see mama, and I used to dance beforethem, or to sit on their knees and sing to them: I liked it. Shall Ilet you hear me sing now?'

　　She had finished her breakfast, so I permitted her to give aspecimen of her accomplishments. Descending from her chair, she cameand placed herself on my knee; then, folding her little hands demurelybefore her, shaking back her curls and lifting her eyes to theceiling, she commenced singing a song from some opera. It was thestrain of a forsaken lady, who, after bewailing the perfidy of herlover, calls pride to her aid; desires her attendant to deck her inher brightest jewels and richest robes, and resolves to meet the falseone that night at a ball, and prove to him, by the gaiety of herdemeanour, how little his desertion has affected her.

　　The subject seemed strangely chosen for an infant singer; but Isuppose the point of the exhibition lay in hearing the notes of loveand jealousy warbled with the lisp of childhood; and in very bad tastethat point was: at least I thought so.

　　Adele sang the canzonette tunefully enough, and with the naivete ofher age. This achieved, she jumped from my knee and said, 'Now,Mademoiselle, I will repeat you some poetry.'

　　Assuming an attitude, she began 'La Ligue des Rats: fable de LaFontaine.' She then declaimed the little piece with an attention topunctuation and emphasis, a flexibility of voice and anappropriateness of gesture, very unusual indeed at her age, andwhich proved she had been carefully trained.

　　'Was it your mama who taught you that piece?' I asked.

　　'Yes, and she just used to say it in this way: "Qu'avez vousdonc? lui dit un de ces rats; parlez!" She made me lift my hand- so-to remind me to raise my voice at the question. Now shall I dancefor you?'

　　'No, that will do: but after your mama went to the Holy Virgin,as you say, with whom did you live then?'

　　'With Madame Frederic and her husband: she took care of me, but sheis nothing related to me. I think she is poor, for she had not so finea house as mama. I was not long there. Mr. Rochester asked me if Iwould like to go and live with him in England, and I said yes; for Iknew Mr. Rochester before I knew Madame Frederic, and he was alwayskind to me and gave me pretty dresses and toys: but you see he has notkept his word, for he has brought me to England, and now he is goneback again himself, and I never see him.'

　　After breakfast, Adele and I withdrew to the library, which room,it appears, Mr. Rochester had directed should be used as theschoolroom. Most of the books were locked up behind glass doors; butthere was one bookcase left open containing everything that could beneeded in the way of elementary works, and several volumes of lightliterature, poetry, biography, travels, a few romances, etc. I supposehe had considered that these were all the governess would requirefor her private perusal; and, indeed, they contented me amply forthe present; compared with the scanty pickings I had now and then beenable to glean at Lowood, they seemed to offer an abundant harvest ofentertainment and information. In this room, too, there was acabinet piano, quite new and of superior tone; also an easel forpainting and a pair of globes.

　　I found my pupil sufficiently docile, though disinclined toapply: she had not been used to regular occupation of any kind. I feltit would be injudicious to confine her too much at first; so, when Ihad talked to her a great deal, and got her to learn a little, andwhen the morning had advanced to noon, I allowed her to return toher nurse. I then proposed to occupy myself till dinner-time indrawing some little sketches for her use.

　　As I was going upstairs to fetch my portfolio and pencils, Mrs.Fairfax called to me: 'Your morning school-hours are over now, Isuppose,' said she. She was in a room the folding doors of which stoodopen: I went in when she addressed me. It was a large, statelyapartment, with purple chairs and curtains, a Turkey carpet,walnut-panelled walls, one vast window rich in stained glass, and alofty ceiling, nobly moulded. Mrs. Fairfax was dusting some vases offine purple spar, which stood on a sideboard.

　　'What a beautiful room!' I exclaimed, as I looked round; for Ihad never before seen any half so imposing.

　　'Yes; this is the dining-room. I have just opened the window, tolet in a little air and sunshine; for everything gets so damp inapartments that are seldom inhabited; the drawing-room yonder feelslike a vault.'

　　She pointed to a wide arch corresponding to the window, and hunglike it with a Tyrian-dyed curtain, now looped up. Mounting to it bytwo broad steps, and looking through, I thought I caught a glimpseof a fairy place, so bright to my novice-eyes appeared the viewbeyond. Yet it was merely a very pretty drawing-room, and within ita boudoir, both spread with white carpets, on which seemed laidbrilliant garlands of flowers; both ceiled with snowy mouldings ofwhite grapes and vine-leaves, beneath which glowed in rich contrastcrimson couches and ottomans; while the ornaments on the pale Parianmantelpiece were of sparkling Bohemian glass, ruby red; and betweenthe windows large mirrors repeated the general blending of snow andfire.

　　'In what order you keep these rooms, Mrs. Fairfax!' said I. 'Nodust, no canvas coverings: except that the air feels chilly, one wouldthink they were inhabited daily.'

　　'Why, Miss Eyre, though Mr. Rochester's visits here are rare,they are always sudden and unexpected; and as I observed that it puthim out to find everything swathed up, and to have a bustle ofarrangement on his arrival, I thought it best to keep the rooms inreadiness.'
