　　'His elder brother?'

　　'Yes. The present Mr. Rochester has not been very long inpossession of the property; only about nine years.'

　　'Nine years is a tolerable time. Was he so very fond of his brotheras to be still inconsolable for his loss?'

　　'Why, no- perhaps not. I believe there were somemisunderstandings between them. Mr. Rowland Rochester was not quitejust to Mr. Edward; and perhaps he prejudiced his father againsthim. The old gentleman was fond of money, and anxious to keep thefamily estate together. He did not like to diminish the property bydivision, and yet he was anxious that Mr. Edward should have wealth,too, to keep up the consequence of the name; and, soon after he was ofage, some steps were taken that were not quite fair, and made agreat deal of mischief. Old Mr. Rochester and Mr. Rowland combinedto bring Mr. Edward into what he considered a painful position, forthe sake of making his fortune: what the precise nature of thatposition was I never clearly knew, but his spirit could not brook whathe had to suffer in it. He is not very forgiving: he broke with hisfamily, and now for many years he has led an unsettled kind of life. Idon't think he has ever been resident at Thornfield for a fortnighttogether, since the death of his brother without a will left himmaster of the estate; and, indeed, no wonder he shuns the old place.'

　　'Why should he shun it?'

　　'Perhaps he thinks it gloomy.'

　　The answer was evasive. I should have liked something clearer;but Mrs. Fairfax either could not, or would not, give me more explicitinformation of the origin and nature of Mr. Rochester's trials. Sheaverred they were a mystery to herself, and that what she knew waschiefly from conjecture. It was evident, indeed, that she wished me todrop the subject, which I did accordingly.

　　I lingered at the gates; I lingered on the lawn; I pacedbackwards and forwards on the pavement; the shutters of the glass doorwere closed; I could not see into the interior; and both my eyes andspirit seemed drawn from the gloomy house- from the grey hollow filledwith rayless cells, as it appeared to me- to that sky expandedbefore me,- a blue sea absolved from taint of cloud; the moonascending it in solemn march; her orb seeming to look up as she leftthe hill-tops, from behind which she had come, far and farther belowher, and aspired to the zenith, midnight dark in its fathomlessdepth and measureless distance; and for those trembling stars thatfollowed her course; they made my heart tremble, my veins glow whenI viewed them. Little things recall us to earth; the clock struck inthe hall; that sufficed; I turned from moon and stars, opened aside-door, and went in.

　　The hall was not dark, nor yet was it lit, only by the high-hungbronze lamp; a warm glow suffused both it and the lower steps of theoak staircase. This ruddy shine issued from the great dining-room,whose two-leaved door stood open, and showed a genial fire in thegrate, glancing on marble hearth and brass fire-irons, and revealingpurple draperies and polished furniture, in the most pleasantradiance. It revealed, too, a group near the mantelpiece: I hadscarcely caught it, and scarcely become aware of a cheerful minglingof voices, amongst which I seemed to distinguish the tones of Adele,when the door closed.

　　I hastened to Mrs. Fairfax's room; there was a fire there too,but no candle, and no Mrs. Fairfax. Instead, all alone, sittingupright on the rug, and gazing with gravity at the blaze, I beheld agreat black and white long-haired dog, just like the Gytrash of thelane. It was so like it that I went forward and said- 'Pilot,' and thething got up and came to me and snuffed me. I caressed him, and hewagged his great tail; but he looked an eerie creature to be alonewith, and I could not tell whence he had come. I rang the bell, forI wanted a candle; and I wanted, too, to get an account of thisvisitant. Leah entered.

　　'What dog is this?'

　　'He came with master.'

　　'With whom?'

　　'With master- Mr. Rochester- he is just arrived.'

　　'Indeed! and is Mrs. Fairfax with him?'

　　'Yes, and Miss Adele; they are in the dining-room, and John is gonefor a surgeon; for master has had an accident; his horse fell andhis ankle is sprained.'

　　'Did the horse fall in Hay Lane?'

　　'Yes, coming down-hill; it slipped on some ice.'

　　'Ah! Bring me a candle, will you, Leah?'

　　Leah brought it; she entered, followed by Mrs. Fairfax, whorepeated the news; adding that Mr. Carter the surgeon was come, andwas now with Mr. Rochester: then she hurried out to give ordersabout tea, and I went upstairs to take off my things.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER XIII

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　MR. ROCHESTER, it seems, by the surgeon's orders, went to bed earlythat night; nor did he rise soon next morning. When he did comedown, it was to attend to business: his agent and some of histenants were arrived, and waiting to speak with him.

　　Adele and I had now to vacate the library: it would be in dailyrequisition as a reception-room for callers. A fire was lit in anapartment upstairs, and there I carried our books, and arranged it forthe future schoolroom. I discerned in the course of the morning thatThornfield Hall was a changed place: no longer silent as a church,it echoed every hour or two to a knock at the door, or a clang ofthe bell: steps, too, often traversed the hall, and new voices spokein different keys below; a rill from the outer world was flowingthrough it; it had a master: for my part, I liked it better.

　　Adele was not easy to teach that day; she could not apply: she keptrunning to the door and looking over the banisters to see if she couldget a glimpse of Mr. Rochester; then she coined pretexts to godownstairs, in order, as I shrewdly suspected, to visit the library,where I knew she was not wanted; then, when I got a little angry,and made her sit still, she continued to talk incessantly of her 'ami,Monsieur Edouard Fairfax de Rochester,' as she dubbed him (I had notbefore heard his prenomens), and to conjecture what presents he hadbrought her: for it appears he had intimated the night before, thatwhen his luggage came from Millcote, there would be found amongst it alittle box in whose contents she had an interest.

　　'Et cela doit signifier,' said she, 'qu'il y aura la dedans uncadeau pour moi, et peut-etre pour vous aussi, mademoiselle.Monsieur a parle de vous: il m'a demande le nom de ma gouvernante,et si elle n'etait pas une petite personne, assez mince et un peupale. J'ai dit qu'oui: car c'est vrai, n'est-ce pas, mademoiselle?'

　　I and my pupil dined as usual in Mrs. Fairfax's parlour; theafternoon was wild and snowy, and we passed it in the schoolroom. Atdark I allowed Adele to put away books and work, and to rundownstairs; for, from the comparative silence below, and from thecessation of appeals to the door-bell, I conjectured that Mr.Rochester was now at liberty. Left alone, I walked to the window;but nothing was to be seen thence: twilight and snowflakes togetherthickened the air, and hid the very shrubs on the lawn. I let down thecurtain and went back to the fireside.

　　In the clear embers I was tracing a view, not unlike a picture Iremembered to have seen of the castle of Heidelberg, on the Rhine,when Mrs. Fairfax came in, breaking up by her entrance the fierymosaic I had been piecing together, and scattering too some heavyunwelcome thoughts that were beginning to throng on my solitude.

　　'Mr. Rochester would be glad if you and your pupil would take teawith him in the drawing-room this evening,' said she: 'he has beenso much engaged all day that he could not ask to see you before.'

　　'When is his tea-time?' I inquired.

　　'Oh, at six o'clock: he keeps early hours in the country. You hadbetter change your frock now; I will go with you and fasten it. Hereis a candle.'

　　'Is it necessary to change my frock?'

　　'Yes, you had better: I always dress for the evening when Mr.Rochester is here.'

　　This additional ceremony seemed somewhat stately; however, Irepaired to my room, and, with Mrs. Fairfax's aid, replaced my blackstuff dress by one of black silk; the best and the only additional oneI had, except one of light grey, which, in my Lowood notions of thetoilette, I thought too fine to be worn, except on first-rateoccasions.

　　'You want a brooch,' said Mrs. Fairfax. I had a single little pearlornament which Miss Temple gave me as a parting keepsake: I put it on,and then we went downstairs. Unused as I was to strangers, it wasrather a trial to appear thus formally summoned in Mr. Rochester'spresence. I let Mrs. Fairfax precede me into the dining-room, and keptin her shade as we crossed that apartment; and, passing the arch,whose curtain was now dropped, entered the elegant recess beyond.

　　Two wax candles stood lighted on the table, and two on themantelpiece; basking in the light and heat of a superb fire, layPilot- Adele knelt near him. Half reclined on a couch appeared Mr.Rochester, his foot supported by the cushion; he was looking atAdele and the dog: the fire shone full on his face. I knew mytraveller with his broad and jetty eyebrows; his square forehead, madesquarer by the horizontal sweep of his black hair. I recognised hisdecisive nose, more remarkable for character than beauty; his fullnostrils, denoting, I thought, choler; his grim mouth, chin, andjaw- yes, all three were very grim, and no mistake. His shape, nowdivested of cloak, I perceived harmonised in squareness with hisphysiognomy: I suppose it was a good figure in the athletic sense ofthe term- broad chested and thin flanked, though neither tall norgraceful.

　　Mr. Rochester must have been aware of the entrance of Mrs.Fairfax and myself; but it appeared he was not in the mood to noticeus, for he never lifted his head as we approached.

　　'Here is Miss Eyre, sir,' said Mrs. Fairfax, in her quiet way. Hebowed, still not taking his eyes from the group of the dog and child.

　　'Let Miss Eyre be seated,' said he: and there was something inthe forced stiff bow, in the impatient yet formal tone, which seemedfurther to express, 'What the deuce is it to me whether Miss Eyre bethere or not? At this moment I am not disposed to accost her.'

　　I sat down quite disembarrassed. A reception of finished politenesswould probably have confused me: I could not have returned or repaidit by answering grace and elegance on my part; but harsh capricelaid me under no obligation; on the contrary, a decent quiescence,under the freak of manner, gave me the advantage. Besides, theeccentricity of the proceeding was piquant: I felt interested to seehow he would go on.

　　He went on as a statue would, that is, he neither spoke normoved. Mrs. Fairfax seemed to think it necessary that some oneshould be amiable, and she began to talk. Kindly, as usual- and, asusual, rather trite- she condoled with him on the pressure of businesshe had had all day; on the annoyance it must have been to him withthat painful sprain: then she commended his patience andperseverance in going through with it.

　　'Madam, I should like some tea,' was the sole rejoinder she got.She hastened to ring the bell; and when the tray came, she proceededto arrange the cups, spoons, etc., with assiduous celerity. I andAdele went to the table; but the master did not leave his couch.

　　'Will you hand Mr. Rochester's cup?' said Mrs. Fairfax to me;'Adele might perhaps spill it.'

　　I did as requested. As he took the cup from my hand, Adele,thinking the moment propitious for making a request in my favour,cried out-

　　'N'est-ce pas, monsieur, qu'il y a un cadeau pour Mademoiselle Eyredans votre petit coffre?'

　　'Who talks of cadeaux?' said he gruffly. 'Did you expect a present,Miss Eyre? Are you fond of presents?' and he searched my face witheyes that I saw were dark, irate, and piercing.

　　'I hardly know, sir; I have little experience of them: they aregenerally thought pleasant things.'

　　'Generally thought? But what do you think?'

　　'I should be obliged to take time, sir, before I could give youan answer worthy of your acceptance: a present has many faces to it,has it not? and one should consider all, before pronouncing an opinionas to its nature.'

　　'Miss Eyre, you are not so unsophisticated as Adele: she demandsa "cadeau," clamorously, the moment she sees me: you beat about thebush.'

　　'Because I have less confidence in my deserts than Adele has: shecan prefer the claim of old acquaintance, and the right too of custom;for she says you have always been in the habit of giving herplaythings; but if I had to make out a case I should be puzzled, sinceI am a stranger, and have done nothing to entitle me to anacknowledgment.'

　　'Oh, don't fall back on over-modesty! I have examined Adele, andfind you have taken great pains with her: she is not bright, she hasno talents; yet in a short time she has made much improvement.'

　　'Sir, you have now given me my "cadeau"; I am obliged to you: it isthe meed teachers most covet-praise of their pupils' progress.'

　　'Humph!' said Mr. Rochester, and he took his tea in silence.

　　'Come to the fire,' said the master, when the tray was takenaway, and Mrs. Fairfax had settled into a corner with her knitting;while Adele was leading me by the hand round the room, showing methe beautiful books and ornaments on the consoles and chiffonnieres.We obeyed, as in duty bound; Adele wanted to take a seat on my knee,but she was ordered to amuse herself with Pilot.

　　'You have been resident in my house three months?'

　　'Yes, sir.'

　　'And you came from-?'

　　'Ah! a charitable concern. How long were you there?'

　　'Eight years.'

　　'Eight years! you must be tenacious of life. I thought half thetime in such a place would have done up any constitution! No wonderyou have rather the look of another world. I marvelled where you hadgot that sort of face. When you came on me in Hay Lane last night, Ithought unaccountably of fairy tales, and had half a mind to demandwhether you had bewitched my horse: I am not sure yet. Who are yourparents?'

　　'I have none.'

　　'Nor ever had, I suppose: do you remember them?'

　　'No.'

　　'I thought not. And so you were waiting for your people when yousat on that stile?'

　　'For whom, sir?'

　　'For the men in green: it was a proper moonlight evening forthem. Did I break through one of your rings, that you spread thatdamned ice on the causeway?'

　　I shook my head. 'The men in green all forsook England a hundredyears ago,' said I, speaking as seriously as he had done. 'And noteven in Hay Lane, or the fields about it, could you find a trace ofthem. I don't think either summer or harvest, or winter moon, willever shine on their revels more.'

　　Mrs. Fairfax had dropped her knitting, and, with raised eyebrows,seemed wondering what sort of talk this was.

　　'Well,' resumed Mr. Rochester, 'if you disown parents, you musthave some sort of kinsfolk: uncles and aunts?'

　　'No; none that I ever saw.'

　　'And your home?'

　　'I have none.'

　　'Where do your brothers and sisters live?'

　　'I have no brothers or sisters.'

　　'Who recommended you to come here?'

　　'I advertised, and Mrs. Fairfax answered my advertisement.'

　　'Yes,' said the good lady, who now knew what ground we were upon,'and I am daily thankful for the choice Providence led me to make.Miss Eyre has been an invaluable companion to me, and a kind andcareful teacher to Adele.'

　　'Don't trouble yourself to give her a character,' returned Mr.Rochester: 'eulogiums will not bias me; I shall judge for myself.She began by felling my horse.'

　　'Sir?' said Mrs. Fairfax.

　　'I have to thank her for this sprain.'

　　The widow looked bewildered.

　　'Miss Eyre, have you ever lived in a town?'

　　'No, sir.'

　　'Have you seen much society?'

　　'None but the pupils and teachers of Lowood, and now the inmates ofThornfield.'

　　'Have you read much?'

　　'Only such books as came in my way; and they have not been numerousor very learned.'

　　'You have lived the life of a nun: no doubt you are well drilled inreligious forms;- Brocklehurst, who I understand directs Lowood, isa parson, is he not?'

　　'Yes, sir.'

　　'And you girls probably worshipped him, as a convent full ofreligieuses would worship their director.'

　　'Oh, no.'

　　'You are very cool! No! What! a novice not worship her priest! Thatsounds blasphemous.'

　　'I disliked Mr. Brocklehurst; and I was not alone in the feeling.He is a harsh man; at once pompous and meddling; he cut off ourhair; and for economy's sake bought us bad needles and thread, withwhich we could hardly sew.'

　　'That was very false economy,' remarked Mrs. Fairfax, who now againcaught the drift of the dialogue.

　　'And was that the head and front of his offending?' demanded Mr.Rochester.

　　'He starved us when he had the sole superintendence of theprovision department, before the committee was appointed; and he boredus with long lectures once a week, and with evening readings frombooks of his own inditing, about sudden deaths and judgments, whichmade us afraid to go to bed.'

　　'What age were you when you went to Lowood?'

　　'About ten.'

　　'And you stayed there eight years: you are now, then, eighteen?'

　　I assented.

　　'Arithmetic, you see, is useful; without its aid, I should hardlyhave been able to guess your age. It is a point difficult to fix wherethe features and countenance are so much at variance as in yourcase. And now what did you learn at Lowood? Can you play?'

　　'A little.'

　　'Of course: that is the established answer. Go into the library-I mean, if you please.- (Excuse my tone of command; I am used tosay, "Do this," and it is done: I cannot alter my customary habits forone new inmate.)- Go, then, into the library; take a candle withyou; leave the door open; sit down to the piano, and play a tune.'

　　I departed, obeying his directions.

　　'Enough!' he called out in a few minutes. 'You play a little, Isee; like any other English school-girl; perhaps rather better thansome, but not well.'

　　I closed the piano and returned. Mr. Rochester continued-

　　'Adele showed me some sketches this morning, which she said wereyours. I don't know whether they were entirely of your doing; probablya master aided you?'

　　'No, indeed!' I interjected.

　　'Ah! that pricks pride. Well, fetch me your portfolio, if you canvouch for its contents being original; but don't pass your word unlessyou are certain: I can recognise patchwork.'

　　'Then I will say nothing, and you shall judge for yourself, sir.'

　　I brought the portfolio from the library.

　　'Approach the table,' said he; and I wheeled it to his couch. Adeleand Mrs. Fairfax drew near to see the pictures.

　　'No crowding,' said Mr. Rochester: 'take the drawings from myhand as I finish with them; but don't push your faces up to mine.'

　　He deliberately scrutinised each sketch and painting. Three he laidaside; the others, when he had examined them, he swept from him.

　　'Take them off to the other table, Mrs. Fairfax,' said he, 'andlook at them with Adele;- you' (glancing at me) 'resume your seat, andanswer my questions. I perceive those pictures were done by onehand: was that hand yours?'

　　'Yes.'

　　'And when did you find time to do them? They have taken muchtime, and some thought.'

　　'I did them in the last two vacations I spent at Lowood, when I hadno other occupation.'

　　'Where did you get your copies?'

　　'Out of my head.'

　　'That head I see now on your shoulders?'

　　'Yes, sir.'

　　'Has it other furniture of the same kind within?'

　　'I should think it may have: I should hope- better.'

　　He spread the pictures before him, and again surveyed themalternately.

　　While he is so occupied, I will tell you, reader, what they are:and first, I must premise that they are nothing wonderful. Thesubjects had, indeed, risen vividly on my mind. As I saw them with thespiritual eye, before I attempted to embody them, they werestriking; but my hand would not second my fancy, and in each case ithad wrought out but a pale portrait of the thing I had conceived.

　　These pictures were in water-colours. The first representedclouds low and livid, rolling over a swollen sea: all the distance wasin eclipse; so, too, was the foreground; or rather, the nearestbillows, for there was no land. One gleam of light lifted intorelief a half-submerged mast, on which sat a cormorant, dark andlarge, with wings flecked with foam; its beak held a gold bracelet setwith gems, that I had touched with as brilliant tints as my palettecould yield, and as glittering distinctness as my pencil could impart.Sinking below the bird and mast, a drowned corpse glanced throughthe green water; a fair arm was the only limb clearly visible,whence the bracelet had been washed or torn.

　　The second picture contained for foreground only the dim peak ofa hill, with grass and some leaves slanting as if by a breeze.Beyond and above spread an expanse of sky, dark blue as at twilight:rising into the sky was a woman's shape to the bust, portrayed intints as dusk and soft as I could combine. The dim forehead wascrowned with a star; the lineaments below were seen as through thesuffusion of vapour; the eyes shone dark and wild; the hair streamedshadowy, like a beamless cloud torn by storm or by electric travail.On the neck lay a pale reflection like moonlight; the same faintlustre touched the train of thin clouds from which rose and bowed thisvision of the Evening Star.

　　The third showed the pinnacle of an iceberg piercing a polar wintersky: a muster of northern lights reared their dim lances, closeserried, along the horizon. Throwing these into distance, rose, in theforeground, a head,- a colossal head, inclined towards the iceberg,and resting against it. Two thin hands, joined under the forehead, andsupporting it, drew up before the lower features a sable veil; abrow quite bloodless, white as bone, and an eye hollow and fixed,blank of meaning but for the glassiness of despair, alone werevisible. Above the temples, amidst wreathed turban folds of blackdrapery, vague in its character and consistency as cloud, gleamed aring of white flame, gemmed with sparkles of a more lurid tinge.This pale crescent was 'the likeness of a kingly crown'; what itdiademed was 'the shape which shape had none.'

　　'Were you happy when you painted these pictures?' asked Mr.Rochester presently.

　　'I was absorbed, sir: yes, and I was happy. To paint them, inshort, was to enjoy one of the keenest pleasures I have ever known.'

　　'That is not saying much. Your pleasures, by your own account, havebeen few; but I daresay you did exist in a kind of artist'sdreamland while you blent and arranged these strange tints. Did yousit at them long each day?'

　　'I had nothing else to do, because it was the vacation, and I satat them from morning till noon, and from noon till night: the lengthof the midsummer days favoured my inclination to apply.'

　　'And you felt self-satisfied with the result of your ardentlabours?'

　　'Far from it. I was tormented by the contrast between my idea andmy handiwork: in each case I had imagined something which I wasquite powerless to realise.'

　　'Not quite: you have secured the shadow of your thought; but nomore, probably. You had not enough of the artist's skill and scienceto give it full being: yet the drawings are, for a school-girl,peculiar. As to the thoughts, they are elfish. These eyes in theEvening Star you must have seen in a dream. How could you make themlook so clear, and yet not at all brilliant? for the planet abovequells their rays. And what meaning is that in their solemn depth? Andwho taught you to paint wind? There is a high gale in that sky, and onthis hill-top. Where did you see Latmos? For that is Latmos. There!put the drawings away!'

　　I had scarce tied the strings of the portfolio, when, looking athis watch, he said abruptly-

　　'It is nine o'clock: what are you about, Miss Eyre, to let Adelesit up so long? Take her to bed!'

　　Adele went to kiss him before quitting the room: he endured thecaress, but scarcely seemed to relish it more than Pilot would havedone, nor so much.

　　'I wish you all good-night, now,' said he, making a movement of thehand towards the door, in token that he was tired of our company,and wished to dismiss us. Mrs. Fairfax folded up her knitting: Itook my portfolio: we curtseyed to him, received a frigid bow inreturn, and so withdrew.

　　'You said Mr. Rochester was not strikingly peculiar, Mrs. Fairfax,'I observed, when I rejoined her in her room, after putting Adele tobed.

　　'Well, is he?'

　　'I think so: he is very changeful and abrupt.'

　　'True: no doubt he may appear so to a stranger, but I am soaccustomed to his manner, I never think of it; and then, if he haspeculiarities of temper, allowance should be made.'

　　'Why?'

　　'Partly because it is his nature- and we can none of us help ournature; and partly because he has painful thoughts, no doubt, toharass him, and make his spirits unequal.'

　　'What about?'

　　'Family troubles, for one thing.'

　　'But he has no family.'

　　'Not now, but he has had- or, at least, relatives. He lost hiselder brother a few years since.'

　　'His elder brother?'

　　'Yes. The present Mr. Rochester has not been very long inpossession of the property; only about nine years.'

　　'Nine years is a tolerable time. Was he so very fond of his brotheras to be still inconsolable for his loss?'

　
　　　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jane Eyre - Charlotte Bronte　　

　　CHAPTER I

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　THERE was no possibility of taking a walk that day. We had beenwandering, indeed, in the leafless shrubbery an hour in the morning;but since dinner (Mrs. Reed, when there was no company, dined early)the cold winter wind had brought with it clouds so sombre, and arain so penetrating, that further outdoor exercise was now out ofthe question.

　　I was glad of it: I never liked long walks, especially on chillyafternoons: dreadful to me was the coming home in the raw twilight,with nipped fingers and toes, and a heart saddened by the chidingsof Bessie, the nurse, and humbled by the consciousness of myphysical inferiority to Eliza, John, and Georgiana Reed.

　　The said Eliza, John, and Georgiana were now clustered roundtheir mama in the drawing-room: she lay reclined on a sofa by thefireside, and with her darlings about her (for the time neitherquarrelling nor crying) looked perfectly happy. Me, she haddispensed from joining the group; saying, 'She regretted to be underthe necessity of keeping me at a distance; but that until she heardfrom Bessie, and could discover by her own observation, that I wasendeavouring in good earnest to acquire a more sociable andchildlike disposition, a more attractive and sprightly manner-something lighter, franker, more natural, as it were- she reallymust exclude me from privileges intended only for contented, happy,little children.'

　　'What does Bessie say I have done?' I asked.

　　'Jane, I don't like cavillers or questioners; besides, there issomething truly forbidding in a child taking up her elders in thatmanner. Be seated somewhere; and until you can speak pleasantly,remain silent.'

　　A small breakfast-room adjoined the drawing-room, I slipped inthere. It contained a bookcase: I soon possessed myself of a volume,taking care that it should be one stored with pictures. I mounted intothe window-seat: gathering up my feet, I sat cross-legged, like aTurk; and, having drawn the red moreen curtain nearly close, I wasshrined in double retirement.

　　Folds of scarlet drapery shut in my view to the right hand; tothe left were the clear panes of glass, protecting, but not separatingme from the drear November day. At intervals, while turning over theleaves of my book, I studied the aspect of that winter afternoon.Afar, it offered a pale blank of mist and cloud; near a scene of wetlawn and storm-beat shrub, with ceaseless rain sweeping away wildlybefore a long and lamentable blast.

　　I returned to my book- Bewick's History of British Birds: theletterpress thereof I cared little for, generally speaking; and yetthere were certain introductory pages that, child as I was, I couldnot pass quite as a blank. They were those which treat of the hauntsof sea-fowl; of 'the solitary rocks and promontories' by them onlyinhabited; of the coast of Norway, studded with isles from itssouthern extremity, the Lindeness, or Naze, to the North Cape-

　　'Where the Northern Ocean, in vast whirls,

　　Boils round the naked, melancholy isles

　　Of farthest Thule; and the Atlantic surge

　　Pours in among the stormy Hebrides.'

　　Nor could I pass unnoticed the suggestion of the bleak shores ofLapland, Siberia, Spitzbergen, Nova Zembla, Iceland, Greenland, with'the vast sweep of the Arctic Zone, and those forlorn regions ofdreary space,- that reservoir of frost and snow, where firm fieldsof ice, the accumulation of centuries of winters, glazed in Alpineheights above heights, surround the pole and concentre themultiplied rigours of extreme cold.' Of these death-white realms Iformed an idea of my own: shadowy, like all the half-comprehendednotions that float dim through children's brains, but strangelyimpressive. The words in these introductory pages connected themselveswith the succeeding vignettes, and gave significance to the rockstanding up alone in a sea of billow and spray; to the broken boatstranded on a desolate coast; to the cold and ghastly moon glancingthrough bars of cloud at a wreck just sinking.

　　I cannot tell what sentiment haunted the quite solitary churchyard,with its inscribed headstone; its gate, its two trees, its lowhorizon, girdled by a broken wall, and its newly-risen crescent,attesting the hour of eventide.

　　The two ships becalmed on a torpid sea, I believed to be marinephantoms.

　　The fiend pinning down the thief's pack behind him, I passed overquickly: it was an object of terror.

　　So was the black horned thing seated aloof on a rock, surveying adistant crowd surrounding a gallows.

　　Each picture told a story; mysterious often to my undevelopedunderstanding and imperfect feelings, yet ever profoundly interesting:as interesting as the tales Bessie sometimes narrated on winterevenings, when she chanced to be in good humour; and when, havingbrought her ironing-table to the nursery hearth, she allowed us to sitabout it, and while she got up Mrs. Reed's lace frills, and crimpedher nightcap borders, fed our eager attention with passages of loveand adventure taken from old fairy tales and other ballads; or (asat a later period I discovered) from the pages of Pamela, and Henry,Earl of Moreland.

　　With Bewick on my knee, I was then happy: happy at least in my way.I feared nothing but interruption, and that came too soon. Thebreakfast-room door opened.

　　'Boh! Madam Mope!' cried the voice of John Reed; then he paused: hefound the room apparently empty.

　　'Where the dickens is she!' he continued. 'Lizzy! Georgy!(calling to his sisters) Joan is not here: tell mama she is run outinto the rain- bad animal!'

　　'It is well I drew the curtain,' thought I; and I wishedfervently he might not discover my hiding-place: nor would John Reedhave found it out himself; he was not quick either of vision orconception; but Eliza just put her head in at the door, and said atonce-

　　'She is in the window-seat, to be sure, Jack.'

　　And I came out immediately, for I trembled at the idea of beingdragged forth by the said Jack.

　　'What do you want?' I asked, with awkward diffidence.

　　'Say, "What do you want, Master Reed?"' was the answer. 'I want youto come here;' and seating himself in an armchair, he intimated by agesture that I was to approach and stand before him.

　　John Reed was a schoolboy of fourteen years old; four years olderthan I, for I was but ten: large and stout for his age, with a dingyand unwholesome skin; thick lineaments in a spacious visage, heavylimbs and large extremities. He gorged himself habitually at table,which made him bilious, and gave him a dim and bleared eye andflabby cheeks. He ought now to have been at school; but his mama hadtaken him home for a month or two, 'on account of his delicatehealth.' Mr. Miles, the master, affirmed that he would do very well ifhe had fewer cakes and sweetmeats sent him from home; but the mother'sheart turned from an opinion so harsh, and inclined rather to the morerefined idea that John's sallowness was owing to over-application and,perhaps, to pining after home.

　　John had not much affection for his mother and sisters, and anantipathy to me. He bullied and punished me; not two or three times inthe week, nor once or twice in the day, but continually: every nerve Ihad feared him, and every morsel of flesh in my bones shrank when hecame near. There were moments when I was bewildered by the terror heinspired, because I had no appeal whatever against either hismenaces or his inflictions; the servants did not like to offendtheir young master by taking my part against him, and Mrs. Reed wasblind and deaf on the subject: she never saw him strike or heard himabuse me, though he did both now and then in her very presence, morefrequently, however, behind her back.

　　Habitually obedient to John, I came up to his chair: he spentsome three minutes in thrusting out his tongue at me as far as hecould without damaging the roots: I knew he would soon strike, andwhile dreading the blow, I mused on the disgusting and ugly appearanceof him who would presently deal it. I wonder if he read that notion inmy face; for, all at once, without speaking, he struck suddenly andstrongly. I tottered, and on regaining my equilibrium retired back astep or two from his chair.

　　'That is for your impudence in answering mama awhile since,' saidhe, 'and for your sneaking way of getting behind curtains, and for thelook you had in your eyes two minutes since, you rat!'

　　Accustomed to John Reed's abuse, I never had an idea of replying toit; my care was how to endure the blow which would certainly followthe insult.

　　'What were you doing behind the curtain?' he asked.

　　'I was reading.'

　　'Show the book.'

　　I returned to the window and fetched it thence.

　　'You have no business to take our books; you are a dependant,mama says; you have no money; your father left you none; you oughtto beg, and not to live here with gentlemen's children like us, andeat the same meals we do, and wear clothes at our mama's expense. Now,I'll teach you to rummage my bookshelves: for they are mine; all thehouse belongs to me, or will do in a few years. Go and stand by thedoor, out of the way of the mirror and the windows.'

　　I did so, not at first aware what was his intention; but when I sawhim lift and poise the book and stand in act to hurl it, Iinstinctively started aside with a cry of alarm: not soon enough,however; the volume was flung, it hit me, and I fell, striking my headagainst the door and cutting it. The cut bled, the pain was sharp:my terror had passed its climax; other feelings succeeded.

　　'Wicked and cruel boy!' I said. 'You are like a murderer- you arelike a slave-driver- you are like the Roman emperors!'

　　I had read Goldsmith's History of Rome, and had formed my opinionof Nero, Caligula, etc. Also I had drawn parallels in silence, which Inever thought thus to have declared aloud.

　　'What! what!' he cried. 'Did she say that to me? Did you hearher, Eliza and Georgiana? Won't I tell mama? but first-'