　　I saw Mr. Lloyd smile and frown at the same time. 'Ghost! What, youare a baby after all! You are afraid of ghosts?'

　　'Of Mr. Reed's ghost I am: he died in that room, and was laid outthere. Neither Bessie nor any one else will go into it at night, ifthey can help it; and it was cruel to shut me up alone without acandle,- so cruel that I think I shall never forget it.'

　　'Nonsense! And is it that makes you so miserable? Are you afraidnow in daylight?'

　　'No: but night will come again before long: and besides,- I amunhappy,- very unhappy, for other things.'

　　'What other things? Can you tell me some of them?'

　　How much I wished to reply fully to this question! How difficult itwas to frame any answer! Children can feel, but they cannot analysetheir feelings; and if the analysis is partially effected inthought, they know not how to express the result of the process inwords. Fearful, however, of losing this first and only opportunityof relieving my grief by imparting it, I, after a disturbed pause,contrived to frame a meagre, though, as far as it went, true response.

　　'For one thing, I have no father or mother, brothers or sisters.'

　　'You have a kind aunt and cousins.'

　　Again I paused; then bunglingly enounced-

　　'But John Reed knocked me down, and my aunt shut me up in thered-room.'

　　Mr. Lloyd a second time produced his snuff-box.

　　'Don't you think Gateshead Hall a very beautiful house?' askedhe. 'Are you not very thankful to have such a fine place to live at?'

　　'It is not my house, sir; and Abbot says I have less right to behere than a servant.'

　　'Pooh! you can't be silly enough to wish to leave such a splendidplace?'

　　'If I had anywhere else to go, I should be glad to leave it; butI can never get away from Gateshead till I am a woman.'

　　'Perhaps you may- who knows? Have you any relations besides Mrs.Reed?'

　　'I think not, sir.'

　　'None belonging to your father?'

　　'I don't know: I asked Aunt Reed once, and she said possibly Imight have some poor, low relations called Eyre, but she knewnothing about them.'

　　'If you had such, would you like to go to them?'

　　I reflected. Poverty looks grim to grown people; still more so tochildren: they have not much idea of industrious, working, respectablepoverty; they think of the word only as connected with ragged clothes,scanty food, fireless grates, rude manners, and debasing vices:poverty for me was synonymous with degradation.

　　'No; I should not like to belong to poor people,' was my reply.

　　'Not even if they were kind to you?'

　　I shook my head: I could not see how poor people had the means ofbeing kind; and then to learn to speak like them, to adopt theirmanners, to be uneducated, to grow up like one of the poor women I sawsometimes nursing their children or washing their clothes at thecottage doors of the village of Gateshead: no, I was not heroic enoughto purchase liberty at the price of caste.

　　'But are your relatives so very poor? Are they working people?'

　　'I cannot tell; Aunt Reed says if I have any, they must be abeggarly set: I should not like to go a-begging.'

　　'Would you like to go to school?'

　　Again I reflected: I scarcely knew what school was: Bessiesometimes spoke of it as a place where young ladies sat in the stocks,wore backboards, and were expected to be exceedingly genteel andprecise: John Reed hated his school, and abused his master; but JohnReed's tastes were no rule for mine, and if Bessie's accounts ofschool-discipline (gathered from the young ladies of a family whereshe had lived before coming to Gateshead) were somewhat appalling, herdetails of certain accomplishments attained by these same young ladieswere, I thought, equally attractive. She boasted of beautifulpaintings of landscapes and flowers by them executed; of songs theycould sing and pieces they could play, of purses they could net, ofFrench books they could translate; till my spirit was moved toemulation as I listened. Besides, school would be a complete change:it implied a long journey, an entire separation from Gateshead, anentrance into a new life.

　　'I should indeed like to go to school,' was the audibleconclusion of my musings.

　　'Well, well! who knows what may happen?' said Mr. Lloyd, as hegot up. 'The child ought to have change of air and scene,' he added,speaking to himself; 'nerves not in a good state.'

　　Bessie now returned; at the same moment the carriage was heardrolling up the gravel-walk.

　　'Is that your mistress, nurse?' asked Mr. Lloyd. 'I should liketo speak to her before I go.'

　　Bessie invited him to walk into the breakfast-room, and led the wayout. In the interview which followed between him and Mrs. Reed, Ipresume, from after-occurrences, that the apothecary ventured torecommend my being sent to school; and the recommendation was no doubtreadily enough adopted; for as Abbot said, in discussing the subjectwith Bessie when both sat sewing in the nursery one night, after I wasin bed, and, as they thought, asleep, 'Missis was, she dared say, gladenough to get rid of such a tiresome, ill-conditioned child, whoalways looked as if she were watching everybody, and scheming plotsunderhand.' Abbot, I think, gave me credit for being a sort ofinfantine Guy Fawkes.

　　On that same occasion I learned, for the first time, from MissAbbot's communications to Bessie, that my father had been a poorclergyman; that my mother had married him against the wishes of herfriends, who considered the match beneath her; that my grandfatherReed was so irritated at her disobedience, he cut her off without ashilling; that after my mother and father had been married a year, thelatter caught the typhus fever while visiting among the poor of alarge manufacturing town where his curacy was situated, and where thatdisease was then prevalent: that my mother took the infection fromhim, and both died within a month of each other.

　　Bessie, when she heard this narrative, sighed and said, 'PoorMiss Jane is to be pitied too, Abbot.'

　　'Yes,' responded Abbot; 'if she were a nice, pretty child, onemight compassionate her forlornness; but one really cannot care forsuch a little toad as that.'

　　'Not a great deal, to be sure,' agreed Bessie: 'at any rate, abeauty like Miss Georgiana would be more moving in the samecondition.'

　　'Yes, I doat on Miss Georgiana!' cried the fervent Abbot. 'Littledarling!- with her long curls and her blue eyes, and such a sweetcolour as she has; just as if she were painted!- Bessie, I could fancya Welsh rabbit for supper.'

　　'So could I- with a roast onion. Come, we'll go down.' They went.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER IV

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　FROM my discourse with Mr. Lloyd, and from the above reportedconference between Bessie and Abbot, I gathered enough of hope tosuffice as a motive for wishing to get well: a change seemed near,-I desired and waited it in silence. It tarried, however: days andweeks passed: I had regained my normal state of health, but no newallusion was made to the subject over which I brooded. Mrs. Reedsurveyed me at times with a severe eye, but seldom addressed me: sincemy illness, she had drawn a more marked line of separation than everbetween me and her own children; appointing me a small closet to sleepin by myself, condemning me to take my meals alone, and pass all mytime in the nursery, while my cousins were constantly in thedrawing-room. Not a hint, however, did she drop about sending me toschool: still I felt an instinctive certainty that she would notlong endure me under the same roof with her; for her glance, nowmore than ever, when turned on me, expressed an insuperable and rootedaversion.

　　Eliza and Georgiana, evidently acting according to orders, spoke tome as little as possible: John thrust his tongue in his cheek wheneverhe saw me, and once attempted chastisement; but as I instantlyturned against him, roused by the same sentiment of deep ire anddesperate revolt which had stirred my corruption before, he thought itbetter to desist, and ran from me uttering execrations, and vowing Ihad burst his nose. I had indeed levelled at that prominent feature ashard a blow as my knuckles could inflict; and when I saw that eitherthat or my look daunted him, I had the greatest inclination tofollow up my advantage to purpose; but he was already with his mama. Iheard him in a blubbering tone commence the tale of how 'that nastyJane Eyre' had flown at him like a mad cat: he was stopped ratherharshly-

　　'Don't talk to me about her, John: I told you not to go near her;she is not worthy of notice; I do not choose that either you or yoursisters should associate with her.'

　　Here, leaning over the banister, I cried out suddenly, andwithout at all deliberating on my words-

　　'They are not fit to associate with me.'

　　Mrs. Reed was rather a stout woman; but, on hearing this strangeand audacious declaration, she ran nimbly up the stair, swept melike a whirlwind into the nursery, and crushing me down on the edge ofmy crib, dared me in an emphatic voice to rise from that place, orutter one syllable during the remainder of the day.

　　'What would Uncle Reed say to you, if he were alive?' was myscarcely voluntary demand. I say scarcely voluntary, for it seemedas if my tongue pronounced words, without my will consenting totheir utterance: something spoke out of me over which I had nocontrol.

　　'What?' said Mrs. Reed under her breath: her usually coldcomposed grey eye became troubled with a look like fear; she tookher hand from my arm, and gazed at me as if she really did not knowwhether I were child or fiend. I was now in for it.

　　'My Uncle Reed is in heaven, and can see all you do and think;and so can papa and mama: they know how you shut me up all day long,and how you wish me dead.'

　　Mrs. Reed soon rallied her spirits: she shook me most soundly,she boxed both my ears, and then left me without a word. Bessiesupplied the hiatus by a homily of an hour's length, in which sheproved beyond a doubt that I was the most wicked and abandoned childever reared under a roof. I half believed her; for I felt indeedonly bad feelings surging in my breast.

　　November, December, and half of January passed away. Christmasand the New Year had been celebrated at Gateshead with the usualfestive cheer; presents had been interchanged, dinners and eveningparties given. From every enjoyment I was, of course, excluded: myshare of the gaiety consisted in witnessing the daily apparelling ofEliza and Georgiana, and seeing them descend to the drawing-room,dressed out in thin muslin frocks and scarlet sashes, with hairelaborately ringleted; and afterwards, in listening to the sound ofthe piano or the harp played below, to the passing to and fro of thebutler and footman, to the jingling of glass and china as refreshmentswere handed, to the broken hum of conversation as the drawing-roomdoor opened and closed. When tired of this occupation, I wouldretire from the stair-head to the solitary and silent nursery:there, though somewhat sad, I was not miserable. To speak truth, I hadnot the least wish to go into company, for in company I was veryrarely noticed; and if Bessie had but been kind and companionable, Ishould have deemed it a treat to spend the evenings quietly withher, instead of passing them under the formidable eye of Mrs. Reed, ina room full of ladies and gentlemen. But Bessie, as soon as she haddressed her young ladies, used to take herself off to the livelyregions of the kitchen and housekeeper's room, generally bearing thecandle along with her. I then sat with my doll on my knee till thefire got low, glancing round occasionally to make sure that nothingworse than myself haunted the shadowy room; and when the embers sankto a dull red, I undressed hastily, tugging at knots and strings asI best might, and sought shelter from cold and darkness in my crib. Tothis crib I always took my doll; human beings must love something,and, in the dearth of worthier objects of affection, I contrived tofind a pleasure in loving and cherishing a faded graven image,shabby as a miniature scarecrow. It puzzles me now to remember withwhat absurd sincerity I doated on this little toy, half fancying italive and capable of sensation. I could not sleep unless it was foldedin my night-gown; and when it lay there safe and warm, I wascomparatively happy, believing it to be happy likewise.

　　Long did the hours seem while I waited the departure of thecompany, and listened for the sound of Bessie's step on the stairs:sometimes she would come up in the interval to seek her thimble or herscissors, or perhaps to bring me something by way of supper- a bunor a cheese-cake- then she would sit on the bed while I ate it, andwhen I had finished, she would tuck the clothes round me, and twiceshe kissed me, and said, 'Good night, Miss Jane.' When thus gentle,Bessie seemed to me the best, prettiest, kindest being in the world;and I wished most intensely that she would always be so pleasant andamiable, and never push me about, or scold, or task me unreasonably,as she was too often wont to do. Bessie, Lee must, I think, havebeen a girl of good natural capacity, for she was smart in all shedid, and had a remarkable knack of narrative; so, at least, I judgefrom the impression made on me by her nursery tales. She was prettytoo, if my recollections of her face and person are correct. Iremember her as a slim young woman, with black hair, dark eyes, verynice features, and good, clear complexion; but she had a capriciousand hasty temper, and indifferent ideas of principle or justice:still, such as she was, I preferred her to any one else at GatesheadHall.

　　It was the fifteenth of January, about nine o'clock in the morning:Bessie was gone down to breakfast; my cousins had not yet beensummoned to their mama; Eliza was putting on her bonnet and warmgarden-coat to go and feed her poultry, an occupation of which she wasfond: and not less so of selling the eggs to the housekeeper andhoarding up the money she thus obtained. She had a turn for traffic,and a marked propensity for saving; shown not only in the vending ofeggs and chickens, but also in driving hard bargains with the gardenerabout flower-roots, seeds, and slips of plants; that functionaryhaving orders from Mrs. Reed to buy of his young lady all the productsof her parterre she wished to sell: and Eliza would have sold the hairoff her head if she could have made a handsome profit thereby. As toher money, she first secreted it in odd corners, wrapped in a rag oran old curl-paper; but some of these hoards having been discoveredby the housemaid, Eliza, fearful of one day losing her valuedtreasure, consented to intrust it to her mother, at a usurious rate ofinterest- fifty or sixty per cent.; which interest she exacted everyquarter, keeping her accounts in a little book with anxious accuracy.

　　Georgiana sat on a high stool, dressing her hair at the glass,and interweaving her curls with artificial flowers and faded feathers,of which she had found a store in a drawer in the attic. I wasmaking my bed, having received strict orders from Bessie to get itarranged before she returned, (for Bessie now frequently employed meas a sort of under-nurserymaid, to tidy the room, dust the chairs,etc.). Having spread the quilt and folded my night-dress, I went tothe window-seat to put in order some picture-books and doll's housefurniture scattered there; an abrupt command from Georgiana to let herplaythings alone (for the tiny chairs and mirrors, the fairy platesand cups, were her property) stopped my proceedings; and then, forlack of other occupation, I fell to breathing on the frost-flowerswith which the window was fretted, and thus clearing a space in theglass through which I might look out on the grounds, where all wasstill and petrified under the influence of a hard frost.

　　From this window were visible the porter's lodge and thecarriage-road, and just as I had dissolved so much of the silver-whitefoliage veiling the panes as left room to look out, I saw the gatesthrown open and a carriage roll through. I watched it ascending thedrive with indifference; carriages often came to Gateshead, but noneever brought visitors in whom I was interested; it stopped in front ofthe house, the door-bell rang loudly, the new-comer was admitted.All this being nothing to me, my vacant attention soon foundlivelier attraction in the spectacle of a little hungry robin, whichcame and chirruped on the twigs of the leafless cherry-tree nailedagainst the wall near the casement. The remains of my breakfast ofbread and milk stood on the table, and having crumbled a morsel ofroll, I was tugging at the sash to put out the crumbs on thewindow-sill, when Bessie came running upstairs into the nursery.

　　'Miss Jane, take off your pinafore; what are you doing there?Have you washed your hands and face this morning?' I gave anothertug before I answered, for I wanted the bird to be secure of itsbread: the sash yielded; I scattered the crumbs, some on the stonesill, some on the cherry-tree bough, then, closing the window, Ireplied-

　　'No, Bessie; I have only just finished dusting.'

　　'Troublesome, careless child! and what are you doing now? Youlook quite red, as if you have been about some mischief: what were youopening the window for?'

　　I was spared the trouble of answering, for Bessie seemed in toogreat a hurry to listen to explanations; she hauled me to thewashstand, inflicted a merciless, but happily brief scrub on my faceand hands with soap, water, and a coarse towel; disciplined my headwith a bristly brush, denuded me of my pinafore, and then hurryingme to the top of the stairs, bid me go down directly, as I waswanted in the breakfast-room.

　　I would have asked who wanted me: I would have demanded if Mrs.Reed was there; but Bessie was already gone, and had closed thenursery-door upon me. I slowly descended. For nearly three months, Ihad never been called to Mrs. Reed's presence; restricted so long tothe nursery, the breakfast, dining, and drawing-rooms were becomefor me awful regions, on which it dismayed me to intrude.

　　I now stood in the empty hall; before me was the breakfast-roomdoor, and I stopped, intimidated and trembling. What a miserablelittle poltroon had fear, engendered of unjust punishment, made ofme in those days! I feared to return to the nursery, and feared togo forward to the parlour; ten minutes I stood in agitated hesitation;the vehement ringing of the breakfast-room bell decided me; I mustenter.

　　'Who could want me?' I asked inwardly, as with both hands Iturned the stiff door-handle, which, for a second or two, resistedmy efforts. 'What should I see besides Aunt Reed in the apartment?-a man or a woman?' The handle turned, the door unclosed, and passingthrough and curtseying low, I looked up at- a black pillar!- such,at least, appeared to me, at first sight, the straight, narrow,sable-clad shape standing erect on the rug: the grim face at the topwas like a carved mask, placed above the shaft by way of capital.

　　Mrs. Reed occupied her usual seat by the fireside; she made asignal to me to approach; I did so, and she introduced me to the stonystranger with the words: 'This is the little girl respecting whom Iapplied to you.'

　　He, for it was a man, turned his head slowly towards where I stood,and having examined me with the two inquisitive-looking grey eyeswhich twinkled under a pair of bushy brows, said solemnly, and in abass voice, 'Her size is small: what is her age?'

　　'Ten years.'

　　'So much?' was the doubtful answer; and he prolonged his scrutinyfor some minutes. Presently he addressed me-

　　'Your name, little girl?'

　　'Jane Eyre, sir.'

　　In uttering these words I looked up: he seemed to me a tallgentleman; but then I was very little; his features were large, andthey and all the lines of his frame were equally harsh and prim.

　　'Well, Jane Eyre, and are you a good child?'

　　Impossible to reply to this in the affirmative: my little worldheld a contrary opinion: I was silent. Mrs. Reed answered for me by anexpressive shake of the head, adding soon, 'Perhaps the less said onthat subject the better, Mr. Brocklehurst.'

　　'Sorry indeed to hear it! she and I must have some talk;' andbending from the perpendicular, he installed his person in thearm-chair opposite Mrs. Reed's. 'Come here,' he said.

　　I stepped across the rug; he placed me square and straight beforehim. What a face he had, now that it was almost on a level withmine! what a great nose! and what a mouth! and what large prominentteeth!

　　'No sight so sad as that of a naughty child,' he began, 'especiallya naughty little girl. Do you know where the wicked go after death?'

　　'They go to hell,' was my ready and orthodox answer.

　　'And what is hell? Can you tell me that?'

　　'A pit full of fire.'

　　'And should you like to fall into that pit, and to be burning therefor ever?'

　　'No, sir.'

　　'What must you do to avoid it?'

　　I deliberated a moment; my answer, when it did come, wasobjectionable: 'I must keep in good health, and not die.'

　　'How can you keep in good health? Children younger than you diedaily. I buried a little child of five years old only a day or twosince,- a good little child, whose soul is now in heaven. It is tobe feared the same could not be said of you were you to be calledhence.'

　　Not being in a condition to remove his doubt, I only cast my eyesdown on the two large feet planted on the rug, and sighed, wishingmyself far enough away.

　　'I hope that sigh is from the heart, and that you repent of everhaving been the occasion of discomfort to your excellentbenefactress.'

　　'Benefactress! benefactress!' said I inwardly: 'they all callMrs. Reed my benefactress; if so, a benefactress is a disagreeablething.'

　　'Do you say your prayers night and morning?' continued myinterrogator.

　　'Yes, sir.'

　　'Do you read your Bible?'

　　'Sometimes.'

　　'With pleasure? Are you fond of it?'

　　'I like Revelations, and the book of Daniel, and Genesis andSamuel, and a little bit of Exodus, and some parts of Kings andChronicles, and Job and Jonah.'

　　'And the Psalms? I hope you like them?'

　　'No, sir.'

　　'No? oh, shocking! I have a little boy, younger than you, who knowssix Psalms by heart: and when you ask him which he would ratherhave, a gingerbread-nut to eat or a verse of a Psalm to learn, hesays: "Oh! the verse of a Psalm! angels sing Psalms;" says he, "I wishto be a little angel here below;" he then gets two nuts inrecompense for his infant piety.'

　　'Psalms are not interesting,' I remarked.

　　'That proves you have a wicked heart; and you must pray to God tochange it: to give you a new and clean one: to take away your heart ofstone and give you a heart of flesh.'

　　I was about to propound a question, touching the manner in whichthat operation of changing my heart was to be performed, when Mrs.Reed interposed, telling me to sit down; she then proceeded to carryon the conversation herself.

　　'Mr. Brocklehurst, I believe I intimated in the letter which Iwrote to you three weeks ago, that this little girl has not quitethe character and disposition I could wish: should you admit herinto Lowood school, I should be glad if the superintendent andteachers were requested to keep a strict eye on her, and, above all,to guard against her worst fault, a tendency to deceit. I mention thisin your hearing, Jane, that you may not attempt to impose on Mr.Brocklehurst.'

　　Well might I dread, well might I dislike Mrs. Reed; for it washer nature to wound me cruelly; never was I happy in her presence;however carefully I obeyed, however strenuously I strove to pleaseher, my efforts were still repulsed and repaid by such sentences asthe above. Now, uttered before a stranger, the accusation cut me tothe heart; I dimly perceived that she was already obliterating hopefrom the new phase of existence which she destined me to enter; Ifelt, though I could not have expressed the feeling, that she wassowing aversion and unkindness along my future path; I saw myselftransformed under Mr. Brocklehurst's eye into an artful, noxiouschild, and what could I do to remedy the injury?

　　'Nothing, indeed,' thought I, as I struggled to repress a sob,and hastily wiped away some tears, the impotent evidences of myanguish.

　　'Deceit is, indeed, a sad fault in a child,' said Mr. Brocklehurst;'it is akin to falsehood, and all liars will have their portion in thelake burning with fire and brimstone; she shall, however, bewatched, Mrs. Reed. I will speak to Miss Temple and the teachers.'

　　'I should wish her to be brought up in a manner suiting herprospects,' continued my benefactress; 'to be made useful, to bekept humble: as for the vacations, she will, with your permission,spend them always at Lowood.'

　　'Your decisions are perfectly judicious, madam,' returned Mr.Brocklehurst. 'Humility is a Christian grace, and one peculiarlyappropriate to the pupils of Lowood; I, therefore, direct thatespecial care shall be bestowed on its cultivation amongst them. Ihave studied how best to mortify in them the worldly sentiment ofpride; and, only the other day, I had a pleasing proof of mysuccess. My second daughter, Augusta, went with her mama to visitthe school, and on her return she exclaimed: "Oh, dear papa, how quietand plain all the girls at Lowood look, with their hair combedbehind their ears, and their long pinafores, and those littleholland pockets outside their frocks- they are almost like poorpeople's children! and," said she, "they looked at my dress andmama's, as if they had never seen a silk gown before."'

　　'This is the state of things I quite approve,' returned Mrs.Reed; 'had I sought all England over, I could scarcely have found asystem more exactly fitting a child like Jane Eyre. Consistency, mydear Mr. Brocklehurst; I advocate consistency in all things.'

　　'Consistency, madam, is the first of Christian duties; and it hasbeen observed in every arrangement connected with the establishment ofLowood: plain fare, simple attire, unsophisticated accommodations,hardy and active habits; such is the order of the day in the house andits inhabitants.'

　　'Quite right, sir. I may then depend upon this child being receivedas a pupil at Lowood, and there being trained in conformity to herposition and prospects?'

　　'Madam, you may: she shall be placed in that nursery of chosenplants, and I trust she will show herself grateful for the inestimableprivilege of her election.'

　　'I will send her, then, as soon as possible, Mr. Brocklehurst; for,I assure you, I feel anxious to be relieved of a responsibility thatwas becoming too irksome.'

　　'No doubt, no doubt, madam; and now I wish you good morning. Ishall return to Brocklehurst Hall in the course of a week or two: mygood friend, the Archdeacon, will not permit me to leave him sooner. Ishall send Miss Temple notice that she is to expect a new girl, sothat there will be no difficulty about receiving her. Good-bye.'

　　'Good-bye, Mr. Brocklehurst; remember me to Mrs. and MissBrocklehurst, and to Augusta and Theodore, and Master BroughtonBrocklehurst.'

　　'I will, madam. Little girl, here is a book entitled the Child'sGuide; read it with prayer, especially that part containing "Anaddicted to falsehood and deceit."'

　　With these words Mr. Brocklehurst put into my hand a thinpamphlet sewn in a cover, and having rung for his carriage, hedeparted.

　　Mrs. Reed and I were left alone: some minutes passed in silence;she was sewing, I was watching her. Mrs. Reed might be at that timesome six or seven and thirty; she was a woman of robust frame,square-shouldered and strong-limbed, not tall, and, though stout,not obese: she had a somewhat large face, the under jaw being muchdeveloped and very solid; her brow was low, her chin large andprominent, mouth and nose sufficiently regular; under her lighteyebrows glimmered an eye devoid of ruth; her skin was dark andopaque, her hair nearly flaxen; her constitution was sound as abell- illness never came near her; she was an exact, clever manager;her household and tenantry were thoroughly under her control; herchildren only at times defied her authority and laughed it to scorn;she dressed well, and had a presence and port calculated to set offhandsome attire.

　　Sitting on a low stool, a few yards from her arm-chair, Iexamined her figure; I perused her features. In my hand I held thetract containing the sudden death of the Liar, to which narrative myattention had been pointed as to an appropriate warning. What had justpassed; what Mrs. Reed had said concerning me to Mr. Brocklehurst; thewhole tenor of their conversation, was recent, raw, and stinging in mymind; I had felt every word as acutely as I had heard it plainly,and a passion of resentment fomented now within me.

　　Mrs. Reed looked up from her work; her eye settled on mine, herfingers at the same time suspended their nimble movements.

　　'Go out of the room; return to the nursery,' was her mandate. Mylook or something else must have struck her as offensive, for shespoke with extreme though suppressed irritation. I got up, I went tothe door; I came back again; I walked to the window, across theroom, then close up to her.

　　Speak I must: I had been trodden on severely, and must turn: buthow? What strength had I to dart retaliation at my antagonist? Igathered my energies and launched them in this blunt sentence-

　　'I am not deceitful: if I were, I should say I loved you; but Ideclare I do not love you: I dislike you the worst of anybody in theworld except John Reed; and this book about the liar, you may giveto your girl, Georgiana, for it is she who tells lies, and not I.'

　　Mrs. Reed's hands still lay on her work inactive: her eye of icecontinued to dwell freezingly on mine.

　　'What more have you to say?' she asked, rather in the tone in whicha person might address an opponent of adult age than such as isordinarily used to a child.

　　That eye of hers, that voice stirred every antipathy I had. Shakingfrom head to foot, thrilled with ungovernable excitement, I continued-

　　'I am glad you are no relation of mine: I will never call youaunt again so long as I live. I will never come to see you when I amgrown up; and if any one asks me how I liked you, and how youtreated me, I will say the very thought of you makes me sick, and thatyou treated me with miserable cruelty.'

　　'How dare you affirm that, Jane Eyre?'

　　'How dare I, Mrs. Reed? How dare I? Because it is the truth. Youthink I have no feelings, and that I can do without one bit of love orkindness; but I cannot live so: and you have no pity. I shall rememberhow you thrust me back- roughly and violently thrust me back- into thered-room, and locked me up there, to my dying day; though I was inagony; though I cried out, while suffocating with distress, "Havemercy! Have mercy, Aunt Reed!" And that punishment you made mesuffer because your wicked boy struck me- knocked me down for nothing.I will tell anybody who asks me questions, this exact tale. Peoplethink you a good woman, but you are bad, hard-hearted. You aredeceitful!'

　　Ere I had finished this reply, my soul began to expand, to exult,with the strangest sense of freedom, of triumph, I ever felt. Itseemed as if an invisible bond had burst, and that I had struggled outinto unhoped-for liberty. Not without cause was this sentiment: Mrs.Reed looked frightened; her work had slipped from her knee; she waslifting up her hands, rocking herself to and fro, and even twistingher face as if she would cry.

　　'Jane, you are under a mistake: what is the matter with you? Why doyou tremble so violently? Would you like to drink some water?'

　　'No, Mrs. Reed.'

　　'Is there anything else you wish for, Jane? I assure you, Idesire to be your friend.'

　　'Not you. You told Mr. Brocklehurst I had a bad character, adeceitful disposition; and I'll let everybody at Lowood know whatyou are, and what you have done.'

　　'Jane, you don't understand these things: children must becorrected for their faults.'

　　'Deceit is not my fault!' I cried out in a savage, high voice.

　　'But you are passionate, Jane, that you must allow: and nowreturn to the nursery- there's a dear- and lie down a little.'

　　'I am not your dear; I cannot lie down: send me to school soon,Mrs. Reed, for I hate to live here.'

　　'I will indeed send her to school soon,' murmured Mrs. Reed sottovoce; and gathering up her work, she abruptly quitted the apartment.

　　I was left there alone- winner of the field. It was the hardestbattle I had fought, and the first victory I had gained: I stoodawhile on the rug, where Mr. Brocklehurst had stood, and I enjoyedmy conqueror's solitude. First, I smiled to myself and felt elate; butthis fierce pleasure subsided in me as fast as did the acceleratedthrob of my pulses. A child cannot quarrel with its elders, as I haddone; cannot give its furious feelings uncontrolled play, as I hadgiven mine, without experiencing afterwards the pang of remorse andthe chill of reaction. A ridge of lighted heath, alive, glancing,devouring, would have been a meet emblem of my mind when I accused andmenaced Mrs. Reed: the same ridge, black and blasted after theflames are dead, would have represented as meetly my subsequentcondition, when half an hour's silence and reflection had shown me themadness of my conduct, and the dreariness of my hated and hatingposition.

　　Something of vengeance I had tasted for the first time; as aromaticwine it seemed, on swallowing, warm and racy: its after-flavour,metallic and corroding, gave me a sensation as if I had been poisoned.Willingly would I now have gone and asked Mrs. Reed's pardon; but Iknew, partly from experience and partly from instinct, that was theway to make her repulse me with double scorn, thereby re-excitingevery turbulent impulse of my nature.

　　I would fain exercise some better faculty than that of fiercespeaking; fain find nourishment for some less fiendish feeling thanthat of sombre indignation. I took a book- some Arabian tales; I satdown and endeavoured to read. I could make no sense of the subject; myown thoughts swam always between me and the page I had usually foundfascinating. I opened the glass-door in the breakfast-room: theshrubbery was quite still: the black frost reigned, unbroken by sun orbreeze, through the grounds. I covered my head and arms with the skirtof my frock, and went out to walk in a part of the plantation whichwas quite sequestered; but I found no pleasure in the silent trees,the falling fir-cones, the congealed relics of autumn, russetleaves, swept by past winds in heaps, and now stiffened together. Ileaned against a gate, and looked into an empty field where no sheepwere feeding, where the short grass was nipped and blanched. It wasa very grey day; a most opaque sky, 'onding on snaw,' canopied all;thence flakes fell at intervals, which settled on the hard path and onthe hoary lea without melting. I stood, a wretched child enough,whispering to myself over and over again, 'What shall I do?- whatshall I do?'

　　All at once I heard a clear voice call, 'Miss Jane! where areyou? Come to lunch!'

　　It was Bessie, I knew well enough; but I did not stir; her lightstep came tripping down the path.

　　'You naughty little thing!' she said. 'Why don't you come whenyou are called?'

　　Bessie's presence, compared with the thoughts over which I had beenbrooding, seemed cheerful; even though, as usual, she was somewhatcross. The fact is, after my conflict with and victory over Mrs. Reed,I was not disposed to care much for the nursemaid's transitoryanger; and I was disposed to bask in her youthful lightness ofheart. I just put my two arms round her and said, 'Come, Bessie! don'tscold.'

　　The action was more frank and fearless than any I was habituated toindulge in: somehow it pleased her.

　　'You are a strange child, Miss Jane,' she said, as she lookeddown at me; 'a little roving, solitary thing: and you are going toschool, I suppose?'

　　I nodded.

　　'And won't you be sorry to leave poor Bessie?'

　　'What does Bessie care for me? She is always scolding me.'

　　'Because you're such a queer, frightened, shy little thing. Youshould be bolder.'

　　'What! to get more knocks?'

　　'Nonsense! But you are rather put upon, that's certain. My mothersaid, when she came to see me last week, that she would not like alittle one of her own to be in your place.- Now, come in, and I'vesome good news for you.'

　　'I don't think you have, Bessie.'

　　'Child! what do you mean? What sorrowful eyes you fix on me!Well, but Missis and the young ladies and Master John are going out totea this afternoon, and you shall have tea with me. I'll ask cook tobake you a little cake, and then you shall help me to look over yourdrawers; for I am soon to pack your trunk. Missis intends you to leaveGateshead in a day or two, and you shall choose what toys you liketo take with you.'

　　'Bessie, you must promise not to scold me any more till I go.'

　　'Well, I will; but mind you are a very good girl, and don't beafraid of me. Don't start when I chance to speak rather sharply;it's so provoking.'

　　'I don't think I shall ever be afraid of you again, Bessie, becauseI have got used to you, and I shall soon have another set of people todread.'

　　'If you dread them they'll dislike you.'

　　'As you do, Bessie?'

　　'I don't dislike you, Miss: I believe I am fonder of you than ofall the others.'

　　'You don't show it.'

　　'You little sharp thing! you've got quite a new way of talking.What makes you so venturesome and hardy?'

　　'Why, I shall soon be away from you, and besides'- I was going tosay something about what had passed between me and Mrs. Reed, but onsecond thoughts I considered it better to remain silent on that head.

　　'And so you're glad to leave me?'

　　'Not at all, Bessie; indeed, just now I'm rather sorry.'

　　'Just now! and rather! How coolly my little lady says it! I daresaynow if I were to ask you for a kiss you wouldn't give it me: you'd sayyou'd rather not.'

　　'I'll kiss you and welcome: bend your head down.' Bessie stooped;we mutually embraced, and I followed her into the house quitecomforted. That afternoon lapsed in peace and harmony; and in theevening Bessie told me some of her most enchaining stories, and sangme some of her sweetest songs. Even for me life had its gleams ofsunshine.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER V

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　FIVE o'clock had hardly struck on the morning of the 19th ofJanuary, when Bessie brought a candle into my closet and found mealready up and nearly dressed. I had risen half an hour before herentrance, and had washed my face, and put on my clothes by the lightof a half-moon just setting, whose rays streamed through the narrowwindow near my crib. I was to leave Gateshead that day by a coachwhich passed the lodge gates at six A.M. Bessie was the only personyet risen; she had lit a fire in the nursery, where she nowproceeded to make my breakfast. Few children can eat when excited withthe thoughts of a journey; nor could I. Bessie, having pressed me invain to take a few spoonfuls of the boiled milk and bread she hadprepared for me, wrapped up some biscuits in a paper and put them intomy bag; then she helped me on with my pelisse and bonnet, and wrappingherself in a shawl, she and I left the nursery. As we passed Mrs.Reed's bedroom, she said, 'Will you go in and bid Missis good-bye?'

　　'No, Bessie: she came to my crib last night when you were gone downto supper, and said I need not disturb her in the morning, or mycousins either; and she told me to remember that she had always beenmy best friend, and to speak of her and be grateful to heraccordingly.'

　　'What did you say, Miss?'

　　'Nothing: I covered my face with the bedclothes, and turned fromher to the wall.'

　　'That was wrong, Miss Jane.'

　　'It was quite right, Bessie. Your Missis has not been my friend:she has been my foe.'

　　'O Miss Jane! don't say so!'

　　'Good-bye to Gateshead!' cried I, as we passed through the hall andwent out at the front door.

　　The moon was set, and it was very dark; Bessie carried a lantern,whose light glanced on wet steps and gravel road sodden by a recentthaw. Raw and chill was the winter morning: my teeth chattered as Ihastened down the drive. There was a light in the porter's lodge: whenwe reached it, we found the porter's wife just kindling her fire: mytrunk, which had been carried down the evening before, stood corded atthe door. It wanted but a few minutes of six, and shortly after thathour had struck, the distant roll of wheels announced the comingcoach; I went to the door and watched its lamps approach rapidlythrough the gloom.

　　'Is she going by herself?' asked the porter's wife.

　　'Yes.'

　　'And how far is it?'

　　'Fifty miles.'

　　'What a long way! I wonder Mrs. Reed is not afraid to trust herso far alone.'

　　The coach drew up; there it was at the gates with its four horsesand its top laden with passengers: the guard and coachman loudly urgedhaste; my trunk was hoisted up; I was taken from Bessie's neck, towhich I clung with kisses.

　　'Be sure and take good care of her,' cried she to the guard, ashe lifted me into the inside.

　　'Ay, ay!' was the answer: the door was slapped to, a voiceexclaimed 'All right,' and on we drove. Thus was I severed from Bessieand Gateshead; thus whirled away to unknown, and, as I then deemed,remote and mysterious regions.

　　I remember but little of the journey; I only know that the dayseemed to me of a preternatural length, and that we appeared to travelover hundreds of miles of road. We passed through several towns, andin one, a very large one, the coach stopped; the horses were takenout, and the passengers alighted to dine. I was carried into an inn,where the guard wanted me to have some dinner; but, as I had noappetite, he left me in an immense room with a fireplace at eachend, a chandelier pendent from the ceiling, and a little red galleryhigh up against the wall filled with musical instruments. Here Iwalked about for a long time, feeling very strange, and mortallyapprehensive of some one coming in and kidnapping me; for I believedin kidnappers, their exploits having frequently figured in Bessie'sfireside chronicles. At last the guard returned; once more I wasstowed away in the coach, my protector mounted his own seat, sounded

　　The afternoon came on wet and somewhat misty: as it waned intodusk, I began to feel that we were getting very far indeed fromGateshead: we ceased to pass through towns; the country changed; greatgrey hills heaved up round the horizon: as twilight deepened, wedescended a valley, dark with wood, and long after night hadoverclouded the prospect, I heard a wild wind rushing amongst trees.

　　Lulled by the sound, I at last dropped asleep; I had not longslumbered when the sudden cessation of motion awoke me; the coach-doorwas open, and a person like a servant was standing at it: I saw herface and dress by the light of the lamps.

　　'Is there a little girl called Jane Eyre here?' she asked. Ianswered 'Yes', and was then lifted out; my trunk was handed down, andthe coach instantly drove away.

　　I was stiff with long sitting, and bewildered with the noise andmotion of the coach: gathering my faculties, I looked about me.Rain, wind, and darkness filled the air; nevertheless, I dimlydiscerned a wall before me and a door open in it; through this doorI passed with my new guide: she shut and locked it behind her. Therewas now visible a house or houses- for the building spread far- withmany windows, and lights burning in some; we went up a broad pebblypath, splashing wet, and were admitted at a door; then the servant ledme through a passage into a room with a fire, where she left me alone.

　　I stood and warmed my numbed fingers over the blaze, then Ilooked round; there was no candle, but the uncertain light from thehearth showed, by intervals, papered walls, carpet, curtains,shining mahogany furniture: it was a parlour, not so spacious orsplendid as the drawing-room at Gateshead, but comfortable enough. Iwas puzzling to make out the subject of a picture on the wall, whenthe door opened, and an individual carrying a light entered; anotherfollowed close behind.

　　The first was a tall lady with dark hair, dark eyes, and a pale andlarge forehead; her figure was partly enveloped in a shawl, hercountenance was grave, her bearing erect.

　　'The child is very young to be sent alone,' said she, putting hercandle down on the table. She considered me attentively for a minuteor two, then further added-

　　'She had better be put to bed soon; she looks tired: are youtired?' she asked, placing her hand on my shoulder.

　　'A little, ma'am.'

　　'And hungry too, no doubt: let her have some supper before she goesto bed, Miss Miller. Is this the first time you have left your parentsto come to school, my little girl?'

　　I explained to her that I had no parents. She inquired how longthey had been dead: then how old I was, what was my name, whether Icould read, write, and sew a little: then she touched my cheekgently with her forefinger, and saying, 'She hoped I should be agood child,' dismissed me along with Miss Miller.

　　The lady I had left might be about twenty-nine; the one who wentwith me appeared some years younger: the first impressed me by hervoice, look, and air. Miss Miller was more ordinary; ruddy incomplexion, though of a careworn countenance; hurried in gait andaction, like one who had always a multiplicity of tasks on hand: shelooked, indeed, what I afterwards found she really was, anunder-teacher. Led by her, I passed from compartment to compartment,from passage to passage, of a large and irregular building; till,emerging from the total and somewhat dreary silence pervading thatportion of the house we had traversed, we came upon the hum of manyvoices, and presently entered a wide, long room, with great dealtables, two at each end, on each of which burnt a pair of candles, andseated all round on benches, a congregation of girls of every age,from nine or ten to twenty. Seen by the dim light of the dips, theirnumber to me appeared countless, though not in reality exceedingeighty; they were uniformly dressed in brown stuff frocks of quaintfashion, and long holland pinafores. It was the hour of study; theywere engaged in conning over their to-morrow's task, and the hum I hadheard was the combined result of their whispered repetitions.