
　　Mrs. Reed's hands still lay on her work inactive: her eye of icecontinued to dwell freezingly on mine.

　　'What more have you to say?' she asked, rather in the tone in whicha person might address an opponent of adult age than such as isordinarily used to a child.

　　That eye of hers, that voice stirred every antipathy I had. Shakingfrom head to foot, thrilled with ungovernable excitement, I continued-

　　'I am glad you are no relation of mine: I will never call youaunt again so long as I live. I will never come to see you when I amgrown up; and if any one asks me how I liked you, and how youtreated me, I will say the very thought of you makes me sick, and thatyou treated me with miserable cruelty.'

　　'How dare you affirm that, Jane Eyre?'

　　'How dare I, Mrs. Reed? How dare I? Because it is the truth. Youthink I have no feelings, and that I can do without one bit of love orkindness; but I cannot live so: and you have no pity. I shall rememberhow you thrust me back- roughly and violently thrust me back- into thered-room, and locked me up there, to my dying day; though I was inagony; though I cried out, while suffocating with distress, "Havemercy! Have mercy, Aunt Reed!" And that punishment you made mesuffer because your wicked boy struck me- knocked me down for nothing.I will tell anybody who asks me questions, this exact tale. Peoplethink you a good woman, but you are bad, hard-hearted. You aredeceitful!'

　　Ere I had finished this reply, my soul began to expand, to exult,with the strangest sense of freedom, of triumph, I ever felt. Itseemed as if an invisible bond had burst, and that I had struggled outinto unhoped-for liberty. Not without cause was this sentiment: Mrs.Reed looked frightened; her work had slipped from her knee; she waslifting up her hands, rocking herself to and fro, and even twistingher face as if she would cry.

　　'Jane, you are under a mistake: what is the matter with you? Why doyou tremble so violently? Would you like to drink some water?'

　　'No, Mrs. Reed.'

　　'Is there anything else you wish for, Jane? I assure you, Idesire to be your friend.'

　　'Not you. You told Mr. Brocklehurst I had a bad character, adeceitful disposition; and I'll let everybody at Lowood know whatyou are, and what you have done.'

　　'Jane, you don't understand these things: children must becorrected for their faults.'

　　'Deceit is not my fault!' I cried out in a savage, high voice.

　　'But you are passionate, Jane, that you must allow: and nowreturn to the nursery- there's a dear- and lie down a little.'

　　'I am not your dear; I cannot lie down: send me to school soon,Mrs. Reed, for I hate to live here.'

　　'I will indeed send her to school soon,' murmured Mrs. Reed sottovoce; and gathering up her work, she abruptly quitted the apartment.

　　I was left there alone- winner of the field. It was the hardestbattle I had fought, and the first victory I had gained: I stoodawhile on the rug, where Mr. Brocklehurst had stood, and I enjoyedmy conqueror's solitude. First, I smiled to myself and felt elate; butthis fierce pleasure subsided in me as fast as did the acceleratedthrob of my pulses. A child cannot quarrel with its elders, as I haddone; cannot give its furious feelings uncontrolled play, as I hadgiven mine, without experiencing afterwards the pang of remorse andthe chill of reaction. A ridge of lighted heath, alive, glancing,devouring, would have been a meet emblem of my mind when I accused andmenaced Mrs. Reed: the same ridge, black and blasted after theflames are dead, would have represented as meetly my subsequentcondition, when half an hour's silence and reflection had shown me themadness of my conduct, and the dreariness of my hated and hatingposition.

　　Something of vengeance I had tasted for the first time; as aromaticwine it seemed, on swallowing, warm and racy: its after-flavour,metallic and corroding, gave me a sensation as if I had been poisoned.Willingly would I now have gone and asked Mrs. Reed's pardon; but Iknew, partly from experience and partly from instinct, that was theway to make her repulse me with double scorn, thereby re-excitingevery turbulent impulse of my nature.

　　I would fain exercise some better faculty than that of fiercespeaking; fain find nourishment for some less fiendish feeling thanthat of sombre indignation. I took a book- some Arabian tales; I satdown and endeavoured to read. I could make no sense of the subject; myown thoughts swam always between me and the page I had usually foundfascinating. I opened the glass-door in the breakfast-room: theshrubbery was quite still: the black frost reigned, unbroken by sun orbreeze, through the grounds. I covered my head and arms with the skirtof my frock, and went out to walk in a part of the plantation whichwas quite sequestered; but I found no pleasure in the silent trees,the falling fir-cones, the congealed relics of autumn, russetleaves, swept by past winds in heaps, and now stiffened together. Ileaned against a gate, and looked into an empty field where no sheepwere feeding, where the short grass was nipped and blanched. It wasa very grey day; a most opaque sky, 'onding on snaw,' canopied all;thence flakes fell at intervals, which settled on the hard path and onthe hoary lea without melting. I stood, a wretched child enough,whispering to myself over and over again, 'What shall I do?- whatshall I do?'

　　All at once I heard a clear voice call, 'Miss Jane! where areyou? Come to lunch!'

　　It was Bessie, I knew well enough; but I did not stir; her lightstep came tripping down the path.

　　'You naughty little thing!' she said. 'Why don't you come whenyou are called?'

　　Bessie's presence, compared with the thoughts over which I had beenbrooding, seemed cheerful; even though, as usual, she was somewhatcross. The fact is, after my conflict with and victory over Mrs. Reed,I was not disposed to care much for the nursemaid's transitoryanger; and I was disposed to bask in her youthful lightness ofheart. I just put my two arms round her and said, 'Come, Bessie! don'tscold.'

　　The action was more frank and fearless than any I was habituated toindulge in: somehow it pleased her.

　　'You are a strange child, Miss Jane,' she said, as she lookeddown at me; 'a little roving, solitary thing: and you are going toschool, I suppose?'

　　I nodded.

　　'And won't you be sorry to leave poor Bessie?'

　　'What does Bessie care for me? She is always scolding me.'

　　'Because you're such a queer, frightened, shy little thing. Youshould be bolder.'

　　'What! to get more knocks?'

　　'Nonsense! But you are rather put upon, that's certain. My mothersaid, when she came to see me last week, that she would not like alittle one of her own to be in your place.- Now, come in, and I'vesome good news for you.'

　　'I don't think you have, Bessie.'

　　'Child! what do you mean? What sorrowful eyes you fix on me!Well, but Missis and the young ladies and Master John are going out totea this afternoon, and you shall have tea with me. I'll ask cook tobake you a little cake, and then you shall help me to look over yourdrawers; for I am soon to pack your trunk. Missis intends you to leaveGateshead in a day or two, and you shall choose what toys you liketo take with you.'

　　'Bessie, you must promise not to scold me any more till I go.'

　　'Well, I will; but mind you are a very good girl, and don't beafraid of me. Don't start when I chance to speak rather sharply;it's so provoking.'

　　'I don't think I shall ever be afraid of you again, Bessie, becauseI have got used to you, and I shall soon have another set of people todread.'

　　'If you dread them they'll dislike you.'

　　'As you do, Bessie?'

　　'I don't dislike you, Miss: I believe I am fonder of you than ofall the others.'

　　'You don't show it.'

　　'You little sharp thing! you've got quite a new way of talking.What makes you so venturesome and hardy?'

　　'Why, I shall soon be away from you, and besides'- I was going tosay something about what had passed between me and Mrs. Reed, but onsecond thoughts I considered it better to remain silent on that head.

　　'And so you're glad to leave me?'

　　'Not at all, Bessie; indeed, just now I'm rather sorry.'

　　'Just now! and rather! How coolly my little lady says it! I daresaynow if I were to ask you for a kiss you wouldn't give it me: you'd sayyou'd rather not.'

　　'I'll kiss you and welcome: bend your head down.' Bessie stooped;we mutually embraced, and I followed her into the house quitecomforted. That afternoon lapsed in peace and harmony; and in theevening Bessie told me some of her most enchaining stories, and sangme some of her sweetest songs. Even for me life had its gleams ofsunshine.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER V

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　FIVE o'clock had hardly struck on the morning of the 19th ofJanuary, when Bessie brought a candle into my closet and found mealready up and nearly dressed. I had risen half an hour before herentrance, and had washed my face, and put on my clothes by the lightof a half-moon just setting, whose rays streamed through the narrowwindow near my crib. I was to leave Gateshead that day by a coachwhich passed the lodge gates at six A.M. Bessie was the only personyet risen; she had lit a fire in the nursery, where she nowproceeded to make my breakfast. Few children can eat when excited withthe thoughts of a journey; nor could I. Bessie, having pressed me invain to take a few spoonfuls of the boiled milk and bread she hadprepared for me, wrapped up some biscuits in a paper and put them intomy bag; then she helped me on with my pelisse and bonnet, and wrappingherself in a shawl, she and I left the nursery. As we passed Mrs.Reed's bedroom, she said, 'Will you go in and bid Missis good-bye?'

　　'No, Bessie: she came to my crib last night when you were gone downto supper, and said I need not disturb her in the morning, or mycousins either; and she told me to remember that she had always beenmy best friend, and to speak of her and be grateful to heraccordingly.'

　　'What did you say, Miss?'

　　'Nothing: I covered my face with the bedclothes, and turned fromher to the wall.'

　　'That was wrong, Miss Jane.'

　　'It was quite right, Bessie. Your Missis has not been my friend:she has been my foe.'

　　'O Miss Jane! don't say so!'

　　'Good-bye to Gateshead!' cried I, as we passed through the hall andwent out at the front door.

　　The moon was set, and it was very dark; Bessie carried a lantern,whose light glanced on wet steps and gravel road sodden by a recentthaw. Raw and chill was the winter morning: my teeth chattered as Ihastened down the drive. There was a light in the porter's lodge: whenwe reached it, we found the porter's wife just kindling her fire: mytrunk, which had been carried down the evening before, stood corded atthe door. It wanted but a few minutes of six, and shortly after thathour had struck, the distant roll of wheels announced the comingcoach; I went to the door and watched its lamps approach rapidlythrough the gloom.

　　'Is she going by herself?' asked the porter's wife.

　　'Yes.'

　　'And how far is it?'

　　'Fifty miles.'

　　'What a long way! I wonder Mrs. Reed is not afraid to trust herso far alone.'

　　The coach drew up; there it was at the gates with its four horsesand its top laden with passengers: the guard and coachman loudly urgedhaste; my trunk was hoisted up; I was taken from Bessie's neck, towhich I clung with kisses.

　　'Be sure and take good care of her,' cried she to the guard, ashe lifted me into the inside.

　　'Ay, ay!' was the answer: the door was slapped to, a voiceexclaimed 'All right,' and on we drove. Thus was I severed from Bessieand Gateshead; thus whirled away to unknown, and, as I then deemed,remote and mysterious regions.

　　I remember but little of the journey; I only know that the dayseemed to me of a preternatural length, and that we appeared to travelover hundreds of miles of road. We passed through several towns, andin one, a very large one, the coach stopped; the horses were takenout, and the passengers alighted to dine. I was carried into an inn,where the guard wanted me to have some dinner; but, as I had noappetite, he left me in an immense room with a fireplace at eachend, a chandelier pendent from the ceiling, and a little red galleryhigh up against the wall filled with musical instruments. Here Iwalked about for a long time, feeling very strange, and mortallyapprehensive of some one coming in and kidnapping me; for I believedin kidnappers, their exploits having frequently figured in Bessie'sfireside chronicles. At last the guard returned; once more I wasstowed away in the coach, my protector mounted his own seat, sounded

　　The afternoon came on wet and somewhat misty: as it waned intodusk, I began to feel that we were getting very far indeed fromGateshead: we ceased to pass through towns; the country changed; greatgrey hills heaved up round the horizon: as twilight deepened, wedescended a valley, dark with wood, and long after night hadoverclouded the prospect, I heard a wild wind rushing amongst trees.

　　Lulled by the sound, I at last dropped asleep; I had not longslumbered when the sudden cessation of motion awoke me; the coach-doorwas open, and a person like a servant was standing at it: I saw herface and dress by the light of the lamps.

　　'Is there a little girl called Jane Eyre here?' she asked. Ianswered 'Yes', and was then lifted out; my trunk was handed down, andthe coach instantly drove away.

　　I was stiff with long sitting, and bewildered with the noise andmotion of the coach: gathering my faculties, I looked about me.Rain, wind, and darkness filled the air; nevertheless, I dimlydiscerned a wall before me and a door open in it; through this doorI passed with my new guide: she shut and locked it behind her. Therewas now visible a house or houses- for the building spread far- withmany windows, and lights burning in some; we went up a broad pebblypath, splashing wet, and were admitted at a door; then the servant ledme through a passage into a room with a fire, where she left me alone.

　　I stood and warmed my numbed fingers over the blaze, then Ilooked round; there was no candle, but the uncertain light from thehearth showed, by intervals, papered walls, carpet, curtains,shining mahogany furniture: it was a parlour, not so spacious orsplendid as the drawing-room at Gateshead, but comfortable enough. Iwas puzzling to make out the subject of a picture on the wall, whenthe door opened, and an individual carrying a light entered; anotherfollowed close behind.

　　The first was a tall lady with dark hair, dark eyes, and a pale andlarge forehead; her figure was partly enveloped in a shawl, hercountenance was grave, her bearing erect.

　　'The child is very young to be sent alone,' said she, putting hercandle down on the table. She considered me attentively for a minuteor two, then further added-

　　'She had better be put to bed soon; she looks tired: are youtired?' she asked, placing her hand on my shoulder.

　　'A little, ma'am.'

　　'And hungry too, no doubt: let her have some supper before she goesto bed, Miss Miller. Is this the first time you have left your parentsto come to school, my little girl?'

　　I explained to her that I had no parents. She inquired how longthey had been dead: then how old I was, what was my name, whether Icould read, write, and sew a little: then she touched my cheekgently with her forefinger, and saying, 'She hoped I should be agood child,' dismissed me along with Miss Miller.

　　The lady I had left might be about twenty-nine; the one who wentwith me appeared some years younger: the first impressed me by hervoice, look, and air. Miss Miller was more ordinary; ruddy incomplexion, though of a careworn countenance; hurried in gait andaction, like one who had always a multiplicity of tasks on hand: shelooked, indeed, what I afterwards found she really was, anunder-teacher. Led by her, I passed from compartment to compartment,from passage to passage, of a large and irregular building; till,emerging from the total and somewhat dreary silence pervading thatportion of the house we had traversed, we came upon the hum of manyvoices, and presently entered a wide, long room, with great dealtables, two at each end, on each of which burnt a pair of candles, andseated all round on benches, a congregation of girls of every age,from nine or ten to twenty. Seen by the dim light of the dips, theirnumber to me appeared countless, though not in reality exceedingeighty; they were uniformly dressed in brown stuff frocks of quaintfashion, and long holland pinafores. It was the hour of study; theywere engaged in conning over their to-morrow's task, and the hum I hadheard was the combined result of their whispered repetitions.

　　Miss Miller signed to me to sit on a bench near the door, thenwalking up to the top of the long room she cried out-

　　'Monitors, collect the lesson-books and put them away!'

　　Four tall girls arose from different tables, and going round,gathered the books and removed them. Miss Miller again gave the wordof command-

　　'Monitors, fetch the supper-trays!'

　　The tall girls went out and returned presently, each bearing atray, with portions of something, I knew not what, arranged thereon,and a pitcher of water and mug in the middle of each tray. Theportions were handed round; those who liked took a draught of thewater, the mug being common to all. When it came to my turn, Idrank, for I was thirsty, but did not touch the food, excitement andfatigue rendering me incapable of eating; I now saw, however, thatit was a thin oaten cake shared into fragments.

　　The meal over, prayers were read by Miss Miller, and the classesfiled off, two and two, upstairs. Overpowered by this time withweariness, I scarcely noticed what sort of a place the bedroom was,except that, like the schoolroom, I saw it was very long. To-night Iwas to be Miss Miller's bed-fellow; she helped me to undress: whenlaid down I glanced at the long rows of beds, each of which wasquickly filled with two occupants; in ten minutes the single light wasextinguished, and amidst silence and complete darkness I fell asleep.

　　The night passed rapidly: I was too tired even to dream; I onlyonce awoke to hear the wind rave in furious gusts, and the rain fallin torrents, and to be sensible that Miss Miller had taken her placeby my side. When I again unclosed my eyes, a loud bell was ringing;the girls were up and dressing; day had not yet begun to dawn, and arushlight or two burned in the room. I too rose reluctantly; it wasbitter cold, and I dressed as well as I could for shivering, andwashed when there was a basin at liberty, which did not occur soon, asthere was but one basin to six girls, on the stands down the middle ofthe room. Again the bell rang; all formed in file, two and two, and inthat order descended the stairs and entered the cold and dimly litschoolroom: here prayers were read by Miss Miller; afterwards shecalled out-

　　'Form classes!'

　　A great tumult succeeded for some minutes, during which Miss Millerrepeatedly exclaimed, 'Silence!' and 'Order!' When it subsided, Isaw them all drawn up in four semicircles, before four chairs,placed at the four tables; all held books in their hands, and agreat book, like a Bible, lay on each table, before the vacant seat. Apause of some seconds succeeded, filled up by the low, vague hum ofnumbers; Miss Miller walked from class to class, hushing thisindefinite sound.

　　A distant bell tinkled: immediately three ladies entered theroom, each walked to a table and took her seat; Miss Miller assumedthe fourth vacant chair, which was that nearest the door, and aroundwhich the smallest of the children were assembled: to this inferiorclass I was called, and placed at the bottom of it.

　　Business now began: the day's Collect was repeated, then certaintexts of Scripture were said, and to these succeeded a protractedreading of chapters in the Bible, which lasted an hour. By the timethat exercise was terminated, day had fully dawned. Theindefatigable bell now sounded for the fourth time: the classes weremarshalled and marched into another room to breakfast: how glad Iwas to behold a prospect of getting something to eat! I was now nearlysick from inanition, having taken so little the day before.

　　The refectory was a great, low-ceiled, gloomy room; on two longtables smoked basins of something hot, which, however, to my dismay,sent forth an odour far from inviting. I saw a universal manifestationof discontent when the fumes of the repast met the nostrils of thosedestined to swallow it; from the van of the procession, the tall girlsof the first class, rose the whispered words-

　　'Disgusting! The porridge is burnt again!'

　　'Silence!' ejaculated a voice; not that of Miss Miller, but oneof the upper teachers, a little and dark personage, smartly dressed,but of somewhat morose aspect, who installed herself at the top of onetable, while a more buxom lady presided at the other. I looked in vainfor her I had first seen the night before; she was not visible: MissMiller occupied the foot of the table where I sat, and a strange,foreign-looking, elderly lady, the French teacher, as I afterwardsfound, took the corresponding seat at the other board. A long gracewas said and a hymn sung; then a servant brought in some tea for theteachers, and the meal began.

　　Ravenous, and now very faint, I devoured a spoonful or two of myportion without thinking of its taste; but the first edge of hungerblunted, I perceived I had got in hand a nauseous mess; burnt porridgeis almost as bad as rotten potatoes; famine itself soon sickens overit. The spoons were moved slowly: I saw each girl taste her food andtry to swallow it; but in most cases the effort was soon relinquished.Breakfast was over, and none had breakfasted. Thanks being returnedfor what we had not got, and a second hymn chanted, the refectorywas evacuated for the schoolroom. I was one of the last to go out, andin passing the tables, I saw one teacher take a basin of theporridge and taste it; she looked at the others; all theircountenances expressed displeasure, and one of them, the stout one,whispered-

　　'Abominable stuff! How shameful!'

　　A quarter of an hour passed before lessons again began, duringwhich the schoolroom was in a glorious tumult; for that space oftime it seemed to be permitted to talk loud and more freely, andthey used their privilege. The whole conversation ran on thebreakfast, which one and all abused roundly. Poor things! it was thesole consolation they had. Miss Miller was now the only teacher in theroom: a group of great girls standing about her spoke with serious andsullen gestures. I heard the name of Mr. Brocklehurst pronounced bysome lips; at which Miss Miller shook her head disapprovingly; but shemade no great effort to check the general wrath; doubtless sheshared in it.

　　A clock in the schoolroom struck nine; Miss Miller left her circle,and standing in the middle of the room, cried-

　　'Silence! To your seats!'

　　Discipline prevailed: in five minutes the confused throng wasresolved into order, and comparative silence quelled the Babel clamourof tongues. The upper teachers now punctually resumed their posts: butstill, all seemed to wait. Ranged on benches down the sides of theroom, the eighty girls sat motionless and erect; a quaint assemblagethey appeared, all with plain locks combed from their faces, not acurl visible; in brown dresses, made high and surrounded by a narrowtucker about the throat, with little pockets of holland (shapedsomething like a Highlander's purse) tied in front of their frocks,and destined to serve the purpose of a work-bag: all, too, wearingwoollen stockings and country-made shoes, fastened with brass buckles.Above twenty of those clad in this costume were full-grown girls, orrather young women; it suited them ill, and gave an air of oddity evento the prettiest.

　　I was still looking at them, and also at intervals examining theteachers- none of whom precisely pleased me; for the stout one was alittle coarse, the dark one not a little fierce, the foreigner harshand grotesque, and Miss Miller, poor thing! looked purple,weather-beaten, and over-worked- when, as my eye wandered from face toface, the whole school rose simultaneously, as if moved by a commonspring.

　　What was the matter? I had heard no order given: I was puzzled. EreI had gathered my wits, the classes were again seated: but as all eyeswere now turned to one point, mine followed the general direction, andencountered the personage who had received me last night. She stood atthe bottom of the long room, on the hearth; for there was a fire ateach end; she surveyed the two rows of girls silently and gravely.Miss Miller, approaching, seemed to ask her a question, and havingreceived her answer, went back to her place, and said aloud-

　　'Monitor of the first class, fetch the globes!'

　　While the direction was being executed, the lady consulted movedslowly up the room. I suppose I have a considerable organ ofveneration, for I retain yet the sense of admiring awe with which myeyes traced her steps. Seen now, in broad day-light, she lookedtall, fair, and shapely; brown eyes with a benignant light in theiririds, and a fine pencilling of long lashes round, relieved thewhiteness of her large front; on each of her temples her hair, of avery dark brown, was clustered in round curls, according to thefashion of those times, when neither smooth bands nor long ringletswere in vogue; her dress, also in the mode of the day, was of purplecloth, relieved by a sort of Spanish trimming of black velvet; agold watch (watches were not so common then as now) shone at hergirdle. Let the reader add, to complete the picture, refined features;a complexion, if pale, clear; and a stately air and carriage, and hewill have, at least, as clearly as words can give it, a correct ideaof the exterior of Miss Temple- Maria Temple, as I afterwards sawthe name written in a prayer-book intrusted to me to carry to church.

　　The superintendent of Lowood (for such was this lady) havingtaken her seat before a pair of globes placed on one of the tables,summoned the first class round her, and commenced giving a lesson ongeography; the lower classes were called by the teachers:repetitions in history, grammar, etc., went on for an hour; writingand arithmetic succeeded, and music lessons were given by MissTemple to some of the elder girls. The duration of each lesson wasmeasured by the clock, which at last struck twelve. The superintendentrose-

　　'I have a word to address to the pupils,' said she.

　　The tumult of cessation from lessons was already breaking forth,but it sank at her voice. She went on-

　　'You had this morning a breakfast which you could not eat; you mustbe hungry:- I have ordered that a lunch of bread and cheese shall beserved to all.'

　　The teachers looked at her with a sort of surprise.

　　'It is to be done on my responsibility,' she added, in anexplanatory tone to them, and immediately afterwards left the room.

　　The bread and cheese was presently brought in and distributed, tothe high delight and refreshment of the whole school. The order wasnow given 'To the garden!' Each put on a coarse straw bonnet, withstrings of coloured calico, and a cloak of grey frieze, I wassimilarly equipped, and, following the stream, I made my way intothe open air.

　　The garden was a wide enclosure, surrounded with walls so high asto exclude every glimpse of prospect; a covered verandah ran downone side, and broad walks bordered a middle space divided intoscores of little beds: these beds were assigned as gardens for thepupils to cultivate, and each bed had an owner. When full of flowersthey would doubtless look pretty; but now, at the latter end ofJanuary, all was wintry blight and brown decay. I shuddered as I stoodand looked round me: it was an inclement day for outdoor exercise; notpositively rainy, but darkened by a drizzling yellow fog; all underfoot was still soaking wet with the floods of yesterday. Thestronger among the girls ran about and engaged in active games, butsundry pale and thin ones herded together for shelter and warmth inthe verandah; and amongst these, as the dense mist penetrated to theirshivering frames, I heard frequently the sound of a hollow cough.

　　As yet I had spoken to no one, nor did anybody seem to takenotice of me; I stood lonely enough: but to that feeling ofisolation I was accustomed; it did not oppress me much. I leantagainst a pillar of the verandah, drew my grey mantle close aboutme, and, trying to forget the cold which nipped me without, and theunsatisfied hunger which gnawed me within, delivered myself up tothe employment of watching and thinking. My reflections were tooundefined and fragmentary to merit record: I hardly yet knew where Iwas; Gateshead and my past life seemed floated away to an immeasurabledistance; the present was vague and strange, and of the future I couldform no conjecture. I looked round the convent-like garden, and thenup at the house- a large building, half of which seemed grey andold, the other half quite new. The new part, containing the schoolroomand dormitory, was lit by mullioned and latticed windows, which gaveit a church-like aspect; a stone tablet over the door bore thisinscription-Brocklehurst, of Brocklehurst Hall, in this county.' 'Let your lightso shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorifyyour Father which is in heaven.'- St. Matt. v. 16.

　　I read these words over and over again: I felt that anexplanation belonged to them, and was unable fully to penetratetheir import. I was still pondering the signification of'Institution', and endeavouring to make out a connection between thefirst words and the verse of Scripture, when the sound of a coughclose behind me made me turn my head. I saw a girl sitting on astone bench near; she was bent over a book, on the perusal of whichshe seemed intent: from where I stood I could see the title- it wasRasselas; a name that struck me as strange, and consequentlyattractive. In turning a leaf she happened to look up, and I said toher directly-

　　'Is your book interesting?' I had already formed the intention ofasking her to lend it to me some day.

　　'I like it,' she answered, after a pause of a second or two, duringwhich she examined me.

　　'What is it about?' I continued. I hardly know where I found thehardihood thus to open a conversation with a stranger; the step wascontrary to my nature and habits: but I think her occupation touched achord of sympathy somewhere; for I too liked reading, though of afrivolous and childish kind; I could not digest or comprehend theserious or substantial.

　　'You may look at it,' replied the girl, offering me the book.

　　I did so; a brief examination convinced me that the contents wereless taking than the title: Rasselas looked dull to my trifling taste;I saw nothing about fairies, nothing about genii; no bright varietyseemed spread over the closely-printed pages. I returned it to her;she received it quietly, and without saying anything she was aboutto relapse into her former studious mood: again I ventured todisturb her-

　　'Can you tell me what the writing on that stone over the doormeans? What is Lowood Institution?'

　　'This house where you are come to live.'

　　'And why do they call it Institution? Is it in any way differentfrom other schools?'

　　'It is partly a charity-school: you and I, and all the rest ofus, are charity-children. I suppose you are an orphan: are noteither your father or your mother dead?'

　　'Both died before I can remember.'

　　'Well, all the girls here have lost either one or both parents, andthis is called an institution for educating orphans.'

　　'Do we pay no money? Do they keep us for nothing?'

　　'We pay, or our friends pay, fifteen pounds a year for each.'

　　'Then why do they call us charity-children?'

　　'Because fifteen pounds is not enough for board and teaching, andthe deficiency is supplied by subscription.'

　　'Who subscribes?'

　　'Different benevolent-minded ladies and gentlemen in thisneighbourhood and in London.'

　　'Who was Naomi Brocklehurst?'

　　'The lady who built the new part of this house as that tabletrecords, and whose son overlooks and directs everything here.'

　　'Why?'

　　'Because he is treasurer and manager of the establishment.'

　　'Then this house does not belong to that tall lady who wears awatch, and who said we were to have some bread and cheese?'

　　'To Miss Temple? Oh, no! I wish it did: she has to answer to Mr.Brocklehurst for all she does. Mr. Brocklehurst buys all our foodand all our clothes.'

　　'Does he live here?'

　　'No- two miles off, at a large hall.'

　　'Is he a good man?'

　　'He is a clergyman, and is said to do a great deal of good.'

　　'Did you say that tall lady was called Miss Temple?'

　　'Yes.'

　　'And what are the other teachers called?'

　　'The one with red cheeks is called Miss Smith; she attends to thework, and cuts out- for we make our own clothes, our frocks, andpelisses, and everything; the little one with black hair is MissScatcherd; she teaches history and grammar, and hears the second classrepetitions; and the one who wears a shawl, and has apocket-handkerchief tied to her side with a yellow ribband, isMadame Pierrot: she comes from Lisle, in France, and teaches French.'

　　'Do you like the teachers?'

　　'Well enough.'

　　'Do you like the little black one, and the Madame-? -I cannotpronounce her name as you do.'

　　'Miss Scatcherd is hasty- you must take care not to offend her;Madame Pierrot is not a bad sort of person.'

　　'But Miss Temple is the best- isn't she?'

　　'Miss Temple is very good and very clever; she is above the rest,because she knows far more than they do.'

　　'Have you been long here?'

　　'Two years.'

　　'Are you an orphan?'

　　'My mother is dead.'

　　'Are you happy here?'

　　'You ask rather too many questions. I have given you answers enoughfor the present: now I want to read.'

　　But at that moment the summons sounded for dinner; all re-enteredthe house. The odour which now filled the refectory was scarcelymore appetising than that which had regaled our nostrils at breakfast:the dinner was served in two huge tin-plated vessels, whence rose astrong steam redolent of rancid fat. I found the mess to consist ofindifferent potatoes and strange shreds of rusty meat, mixed andcooked together. Of this preparation a tolerably abundant plateful wasapportioned to each pupil. I ate what I could, and wondered withinmyself whether every day's fare would be like this.

　　After dinner, we immediately adjourned to the schoolroom: lessonsrecommenced, and were continued till five o'clock.

　　The only marked event of the afternoon was, that I saw the girlwith whom I had conversed in the verandah dismissed in disgrace byMiss Scatcherd from a history class, and sent to stand in the middleof the large schoolroom. The punishment seemed to me in a highdegree ignominious, especially for so great a girl- she lookedthirteen or upwards. I expected she would show signs of great distressand shame; but to my surprise she neither wept nor blushed:composed, though grave, she stood, the central mark of all eyes.'How can she bear it so quietly- so firmly?' I asked of myself.'Were I in her place, it seems to me I should wish the earth to openand swallow me up. She looks as if she were thinking of somethingbeyond her punishment- beyond her situation: of something not roundher nor before her. I have heard of day-dreams- is she in aday-dream now? Her eyes are fixed on the floor, but I am sure theydo not see it- her sight seems turned in, gone down into her heart:she is looking at what she can remember, I believe; not at what isreally present. I wonder what sort of a girl she is- whether good ornaughty.'

　　Soon after five P.M. we had another meal, consisting of a small mugof coffee, and half a slice of brown bread. I devoured my bread anddrank my coffee with relish; but I should have been glad of as muchmore- I was still hungry. Half an hour's recreation succeeded, thenstudy; then the glass of water and the piece of oat-cake, prayers, andbed. Such was my first day at Lowood.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER VI--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　THE next day commenced as before, getting up and dressing byrushlight; but this morning we were obliged to dispense with theceremony of washing; the water in the pitchers was frozen. A changehad taken place in the weather the preceding evening, and a keennorth-east wind, whistling through the crevices of our bedroom windowsall night long, had made us shiver in our beds, and turned thecontents of the ewers to ice.

　　Before the long hour and a half of prayers and Bible-reading wasover, I felt ready to perish with cold. Breakfast-time came at last,and this morning the porridge was not burnt; the quality waseatable, the quantity small. How small my portion seemed! I wishedit had been doubled.

　　In the course of the day I was enrolled a member of the fourthclass, and regular tasks and occupations were assigned me: hitherto, Ihad only been a spectator of the proceedings at Lowood; I was now tobecome an actor therein. At first, being little accustomed to learn byheart, the lessons appeared to me both long and difficult; thefrequent change from task to task, too, bewildered me; and I wasglad when, about three o'clock in the afternoon, Miss Smith put intomy hands a border of muslin two yards long, together with needle,thimble, etc., and sent me to sit in a quiet corner of the schoolroom,with directions to hem the same. At that hour most of the otherswere sewing likewise; but one class still stood round Miss Scatcherd'schair reading, and as all was quiet, the subject of their lessonscould be heard, together with the manner in which each girlacquitted herself, and the animadversions or commendations of MissScatcherd on the performance. It was English history: among thereaders I observed my acquaintance of the verandah: at thecommencement of the lesson, her place had been at the top of theclass, but for some error of pronunciation, or some inattention tostops, she was suddenly sent to the very bottom. Even in thatobscure position, Miss Scatcherd continued to make her an object ofconstant notice; she was continually addressing to her such phrases asthe following:-

　　'Burns' (such it seems was her name: the girls here were all calledby their surnames, as boys are elsewhere), 'Burns, you are standing onthe side of your shoe; turn your toes out immediately.' 'Burns, youpoke your chin most unpleasantly; draw it in.' 'Burns, I insist onyour holding your head up; I will not have you before me in thatattitude,' etc. etc.

　　A chapter having been read through twice, the books were closed andthe girls examined. The lesson had comprised part of the reign ofCharles I, and there were sundry questions about tonnage andpoundage and ship-money, which most of them appeared unable to answer;still, every little difficulty was solved instantly when it reachedBurns: her memory seemed to have retained the substance of the wholelesson, and she was ready with answers on every point. I keptexpecting that Miss Scatcherd would praise her attention; but, insteadof that, she suddenly cried out-

　　'You dirty, disagreeable girl! you have never cleaned your nailsthis morning!'

　　Burns made no answer: I wondered at her silence.

　　'Why,' thought I, 'does she not explain that she could neitherclean her nails nor wash her face, as the water was frozen?'

　　My attention was now called off by Miss Smith desiring me to hold askein of thread: while she was winding it, she talked to me fromtime to time, asking whether I had ever been at school before, whetherI could mark, stitch, knit, etc.; till she dismissed me, I could notpursue my observations on Miss Scatcherd's movements. When Ireturned to my seat, that lady was just delivering an order of which Idid not catch the import; but Burns immediately left the class, andgoing into the small inner room where the books were kept, returned inhalf a minute, carrying in her hand a bundle of twigs tied together atone end. This ominous tool she presented to Miss Scatcherd with arespectful curtsey; then she quietly, and without being told, unloosedher pinafore, and the teacher instantly and sharply inflicted on herneck a dozen strokes with the bunch of twigs. Not a tear rose toBurns's eye; and, while I paused from my sewing, because my fingersquivered at this spectacle with a sentiment of unavailing and impotentanger, not a feature of her pensive face altered its ordinaryexpression.

　　'Hardened girl!' exclaimed Miss Scatcherd; 'nothing can correct youof your slatternly habits: carry the rod away.'

　　Burns obeyed: I looked at her narrowly as she emerged from thebook-closet; she was just putting back her handkerchief into herpocket, and the trace of a tear glistened on her thin cheek.

　　The play-hour in the evening I thought the pleasantest fractionof the day at Lowood: the bit of bread, the draught of coffeeswallowed at five o'clock had revived vitality, if it had notsatisfied hunger: the long restraint of the day was slackened; theschoolroom felt warmer than in the morning- its fires being allowed toburn a little more brightly, to supply, in some measure, the placeof candles, not yet introduced: the ruddy gloaming, the licenseduproar, the confusion of many voices gave one a welcome sense ofliberty.

　　On the evening of the day on which I had seen Miss Scatcherd flogher pupil, Burns, I wandered as usual among the forms and tables andlaughing groups without a companion, yet not feeling lonely: when Ipassed the windows, I now and then lifted a blind, and looked out;it snowed fast, a drift was already forming against the lower panes;putting my ear close to the window, I could distinguish from thegleeful tumult within, the disconsolate moan of the wind outside.

　　Probably, if I had lately left a good home and kind parents, thiswould have been the hour when I should most keenly have regrettedthe separation; that wind would then have saddened my heart, thisobscure chaos would have disturbed my peace! as it was, I derived fromboth a strange excitement, and reckless and feverish, I wished thewind to howl more wildly, the gloom to deepen to darkness, and theconfusion to rise to clamour.

　　Jumping over forms, and creeping under tables, I made my way to oneof the fire-places; there, kneeling by the high wire fender, I foundBurns, absorbed, silent, abstracted from all round her by thecompanionship of a book, which she read by the dim glare of theembers.

　　'Is it still Rasselas?' I asked, coming behind her.

　　'Yes,' she said, 'and I have just finished it.'

　　And in five minutes more she shut it up. I was glad of this.

　　'Now,' thought I, 'I can perhaps get her to talk.' I sat down byher on the floor.

　　'What is your name besides Burns?'

　　'Helen.'

　　'Do you come a long way from here?'

　　'I come from a place farther north, quite on the borders ofScotland.'

　　'Will you ever go back?'

　　'I hope so; but nobody can be sure of the future.'

　　'You must wish to leave Lowood?'

　　'No! why should I? I was sent to Lowood to get an education; and itwould be of no use going away until I have attained that object.'

　　'But that teacher, Miss Scatcherd, is so cruel to you?'

　　'Cruel? Not at all! She is severe: she dislikes my faults.'

　　'And if I were in your place I should dislike her; I shouldresist her. If she struck me with that rod, I should get it from herhand; I should break it under her nose.'

　　'Probably you would do nothing of the sort: but if you did, Mr.Brocklehurst would expel you from the school; that would be a greatgrief to your relations. It is far better to endure patiently asmart which nobody feels but yourself, than to commit a hasty actionwhose evil consequences will extend to all connected with you; andbesides, the Bible bids us return good for evil.'

　　'But then it seems disgraceful to be flogged, and to be sent tostand in the middle of a room full of people; and you are such a greatgirl: I am far younger than you, and I could not bear it.'

　　'Yet it would be your duty to bear it, if you could not avoid it:it is weak and silly to say you cannot bear what it is your fate to berequired to bear.'

　　I heard her with wonder: I could not comprehend this doctrine ofendurance; and still less could I understand or sympathise with theforbearance she expressed for her chastiser. Still I felt that HelenBurns considered things by a light invisible to my eyes. I suspectedshe might be right and I wrong; but I would not ponder the matterdeeply; like Felix, I put it off to a more convenient season.

　　'You say you have faults, Helen: what are they? To me you seem verygood.'

　　'Then learn from me, not to judge by appearances: I am, as MissScatcherd said, slatternly; I seldom put, and never keep, things inorder; I am careless; I forget rules; I read when I should learn mylessons; I have no method; and sometimes I say, like you, I cannotbear to be subjected to systematic arrangements. This is all veryprovoking to Miss Scatcherd, who is naturally neat, punctual, andparticular.'
