　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　THERE was no possibility of taking a walk that day. We had beenwandering, indeed, in the leafless shrubbery an hour in the morning;but since dinner (Mrs. Reed, when there was no company, dined early)the cold winter wind had brought with it clouds so sombre, and arain so penetrating, that further outdoor exercise was now out ofthe question.

　　I was glad of it: I never liked long walks, especially on chillyafternoons: dreadful to me was the coming home in the raw twilight,with nipped fingers and toes, and a heart saddened by the chidingsof Bessie, the nurse, and humbled by the consciousness of myphysical inferiority to Eliza, John, and Georgiana Reed.

　　The said Eliza, John, and Georgiana were now clustered roundtheir mama in the drawing-room: she lay reclined on a sofa by thefireside, and with her darlings about her (for the time neitherquarrelling nor crying) looked perfectly happy. Me, she haddispensed from joining the group; saying, 'She regretted to be underthe necessity of keeping me at a distance; but that until she heardfrom Bessie, and could discover by her own observation, that I wasendeavouring in good earnest to acquire a more sociable andchildlike disposition, a more attractive and sprightly manner-something lighter, franker, more natural, as it were- she reallymust exclude me from privileges intended only for contented, happy,little children.'

　　'What does Bessie say I have done?' I asked.

　　'Jane, I don't like cavillers or questioners; besides, there issomething truly forbidding in a child taking up her elders in thatmanner. Be seated somewhere; and until you can speak pleasantly,remain silent.'

　　A small breakfast-room adjoined the drawing-room, I slipped inthere. It contained a bookcase: I soon possessed myself of a volume,taking care that it should be one stored with pictures. I mounted intothe window-seat: gathering up my feet, I sat cross-legged, like aTurk; and, having drawn the red moreen curtain nearly close, I wasshrined in double retirement.

　　Folds of scarlet drapery shut in my view to the right hand; tothe left were the clear panes of glass, protecting, but not separatingme from the drear November day. At intervals, while turning over theleaves of my book, I studied the aspect of that winter afternoon.Afar, it offered a pale blank of mist and cloud; near a scene of wetlawn and storm-beat shrub, with ceaseless rain sweeping away wildlybefore a long and lamentable blast.

　　I returned to my book- Bewick's History of British Birds: theletterpress thereof I cared little for, generally speaking; and yetthere were certain introductory pages that, child as I was, I couldnot pass quite as a blank. They were those which treat of the hauntsof sea-fowl; of 'the solitary rocks and promontories' by them onlyinhabited; of the coast of Norway, studded with isles from itssouthern extremity, the Lindeness, or Naze, to the North Cape-

　　'Where the Northern Ocean, in vast whirls,

　　Boils round the naked, melancholy isles

　　Of farthest Thule; and the Atlantic surge

　　Pours in among the stormy Hebrides.'

　　Nor could I pass unnoticed the suggestion of the bleak shores ofLapland, Siberia, Spitzbergen, Nova Zembla, Iceland, Greenland, with'the vast sweep of the Arctic Zone, and those forlorn regions ofdreary space,- that reservoir of frost and snow, where firm fieldsof ice, the accumulation of centuries of winters, glazed in Alpineheights above heights, surround the pole and concentre themultiplied rigours of extreme cold.' Of these death-white realms Iformed an idea of my own: shadowy, like all the half-comprehendednotions that float dim through children's brains, but strangelyimpressive. The words in these introductory pages connected themselveswith the succeeding vignettes, and gave significance to the rockstanding up alone in a sea of billow and spray; to the broken boatstranded on a desolate coast; to the cold and ghastly moon glancingthrough bars of cloud at a wreck just sinking.

　　I cannot tell what sentiment haunted the quite solitary churchyard,with its inscribed headstone; its gate, its two trees, its lowhorizon, girdled by a broken wall, and its newly-risen crescent,attesting the hour of eventide.

　　The two ships becalmed on a torpid sea, I believed to be marinephantoms.

　　The fiend pinning down the thief's pack behind him, I passed overquickly: it was an object of terror.

　　So was the black horned thing seated aloof on a rock, surveying adistant crowd surrounding a gallows.

　　Each picture told a story; mysterious often to my undevelopedunderstanding and imperfect feelings, yet ever profoundly interesting:as interesting as the tales Bessie sometimes narrated on winterevenings, when she chanced to be in good humour; and when, havingbrought her ironing-table to the nursery hearth, she allowed us to sitabout it, and while she got up Mrs. Reed's lace frills, and crimpedher nightcap borders, fed our eager attention with passages of loveand adventure taken from old fairy tales and other ballads; or (asat a later period I discovered) from the pages of Pamela, and Henry,Earl of Moreland.

　　With Bewick on my knee, I was then happy: happy at least in my way.I feared nothing but interruption, and that came too soon. Thebreakfast-room door opened.

　　'Boh! Madam Mope!' cried the voice of John Reed; then he paused: hefound the room apparently empty.

　　'Where the dickens is she!' he continued. 'Lizzy! Georgy!(calling to his sisters) Joan is not here: tell mama she is run outinto the rain- bad animal!'

　　'It is well I drew the curtain,' thought I; and I wishedfervently he might not discover my hiding-place: nor would John Reedhave found it out himself; he was not quick either of vision orconception; but Eliza just put her head in at the door, and said atonce-

　　'She is in the window-seat, to be sure, Jack.'

　　And I came out immediately, for I trembled at the idea of beingdragged forth by the said Jack.

　　'What do you want?' I asked, with awkward diffidence.

　　'Say, "What do you want, Master Reed?"' was the answer. 'I want youto come here;' and seating himself in an armchair, he intimated by agesture that I was to approach and stand before him.

　　John Reed was a schoolboy of fourteen years old; four years olderthan I, for I was but ten: large and stout for his age, with a dingyand unwholesome skin; thick lineaments in a spacious visage, heavylimbs and large extremities. He gorged himself habitually at table,which made him bilious, and gave him a dim and bleared eye andflabby cheeks. He ought now to have been at school; but his mama hadtaken him home for a month or two, 'on account of his delicatehealth.' Mr. Miles, the master, affirmed that he would do very well ifhe had fewer cakes and sweetmeats sent him from home; but the mother'sheart turned from an opinion so harsh, and inclined rather to the morerefined idea that John's sallowness was owing to over-application and,perhaps, to pining after home.

　　John had not much affection for his mother and sisters, and anantipathy to me. He bullied and punished me; not two or three times inthe week, nor once or twice in the day, but continually: every nerve Ihad feared him, and every morsel of flesh in my bones shrank when hecame near. There were moments when I was bewildered by the terror heinspired, because I had no appeal whatever against either hismenaces or his inflictions; the servants did not like to offendtheir young master by taking my part against him, and Mrs. Reed wasblind and deaf on the subject: she never saw him strike or heard himabuse me, though he did both now and then in her very presence, morefrequently, however, behind her back.

　　Habitually obedient to John, I came up to his chair: he spentsome three minutes in thrusting out his tongue at me as far as hecould without damaging the roots: I knew he would soon strike, andwhile dreading the blow, I mused on the disgusting and ugly appearanceof him who would presently deal it. I wonder if he read that notion inmy face; for, all at once, without speaking, he struck suddenly andstrongly. I tottered, and on regaining my equilibrium retired back astep or two from his chair.

　　'That is for your impudence in answering mama awhile since,' saidhe, 'and for your sneaking way of getting behind curtains, and for thelook you had in your eyes two minutes since, you rat!'

　　Accustomed to John Reed's abuse, I never had an idea of replying toit; my care was how to endure the blow which would certainly followthe insult.

　　'What were you doing behind the curtain?' he asked.

　　'I was reading.'

　　'Show the book.'

　　I returned to the window and fetched it thence.

　　'You have no business to take our books; you are a dependant,mama says; you have no money; your father left you none; you oughtto beg, and not to live here with gentlemen's children like us, andeat the same meals we do, and wear clothes at our mama's expense. Now,I'll teach you to rummage my bookshelves: for they are mine; all thehouse belongs to me, or will do in a few years. Go and stand by thedoor, out of the way of the mirror and the windows.'

　　I did so, not at first aware what was his intention; but when I sawhim lift and poise the book and stand in act to hurl it, Iinstinctively started aside with a cry of alarm: not soon enough,however; the volume was flung, it hit me, and I fell, striking my headagainst the door and cutting it. The cut bled, the pain was sharp:my terror had passed its climax; other feelings succeeded.

　　'Wicked and cruel boy!' I said. 'You are like a murderer- you arelike a slave-driver- you are like the Roman emperors!'

　　I had read Goldsmith's History of Rome, and had formed my opinionof Nero, Caligula, etc. Also I had drawn parallels in silence, which Inever thought thus to have declared aloud.

　　'What! what!' he cried. 'Did she say that to me? Did you hearher, Eliza and Georgiana? Won't I tell mama? but first-'

　　He ran headlong at me: I felt him grasp my hair and my shoulder: hehad closed with a desperate thing. I really saw in him a tyrant, amurderer. I felt a drop or two of blood from my head trickle down myneck, and was sensible of somewhat pungent suffering: these sensationsfor the time predominated over fear, and I received him in franticsort. I don't very well know what I did with my hands, but he calledme 'Rat! Rat!' and bellowed out aloud. Aid was near him: Eliza andGeorgiana had run for Mrs. Reed, who was gone upstairs: she now cameupon the scene, followed by Bessie and her maid Abbot. We were parted:I heard the words-

　　'Dear! dear! What a fury to fly at Master John!'

　　'Did ever anybody see such a picture of passion!'

　　Then Mrs. Reed subjoined-

　　'Take her away to the red-room, and lock her in there.' Fourhands were immediately laid upon me, and I was borne upstairs.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER II--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　I RESISTED all the way: a new thing for me, and a circumstancewhich greatly strengthened the bad opinion Bessie and Miss Abbotwere disposed to entertain of me. The fact is, I was a trifle besidemyself; or rather out of myself, as the French would say: I wasconscious that a moment's mutiny had already rendered me liable tostrange penalties, and, like any other rebel slave, I felt resolved,in my desperation, to go all lengths.

　　'Hold her arms, Miss Abbot: she's like a mad cat.'

　　'For shame! for shame!' cried the lady's-maid. 'What shockingconduct, Miss Eyre, to strike a young gentleman, your benefactress'sson! Your young master.'

　　'Master! How is he my master? Am I a servant?'

　　'No; you are less than a servant, for you do nothing for your keep.There, sit down, and think over your wickedness.'

　　They had got me by this time into the apartment indicated by Mrs.Reed, and had thrust me upon a stool: my impulse was to rise from itlike a spring; their two pair of hands arrested me instantly.

　　'If you don't sit still, you must be tied down,' said Bessie. 'MissAbbot, lend me your garters; she would break mine directly.'

　　Miss Abbot turned to divest a stout leg of the necessaryligature. This preparation for bonds, and the additional ignominy itinferred, took a little of the excitement out of me.

　　'Don't take them off,' I cried; 'I will not stir.'

　　In guarantee whereof, I attached myself to my seat by my hands.

　　'Mind you don't,' said Bessie; and when she had ascertained thatI was really subsiding, she loosened her hold of me; then she and MissAbbot stood with folded arms, looking darkly and doubtfully on myface, as incredulous of my sanity.

　　'She never did so before,' at last said Bessie, turning to theAbigail.

　　'But it was always in her,' was the reply. 'I've told Missisoften my opinion about the child, and Missis agreed with me. She'san underhand little thing: I never saw a girl of her age with somuch cover.'

　　Bessie answered not; but ere long, addressing me, she said-

　　'You ought to be aware, Miss, that you are under obligations toMrs. Reed: she keeps you: if she were to turn you off, you wouldhave to go to the poorhouse.'

　　I had nothing to say to these words: they were not new to me: myvery first recollections of existence included hints of the same kind.This reproach of my dependence had become a vague sing-song in my ear:very painful and crushing, but only half intelligible. Miss Abbotjoined in-

　　'And you ought not to think yourself on an equality with the MissesReed and Master Reed, because Missis kindly allows you to be broughtup with them. They will have a great deal of money, and you willhave none: it is your place to be humble, and to try to makeyourself agreeable to them.'

　　'What we tell you is for your good,' added Bessie, in no harshvoice; 'you should try to be useful and pleasant, then, perhaps, youwould have a home here; but if you become passionate and rude,Missis will send you away, I am sure.'

　　'Besides,' said Miss Abbot, 'God will punish her: He might strikeher dead in the midst of her tantrums, and then where would she go?Come, Bessie, we will leave her: I wouldn't have her heart foranything. Say your prayers, Miss Eyre, when you are by yourself; forif you don't repent, something bad might be permitted to come down thechimney and fetch you away.'

　　They went, shutting the door, and locking it behind them.

　　The red-room was a square chamber, very seldom slept in, I mightsay never, indeed, unless when a chance influx of visitors atGateshead Hall rendered it necessary to turn to account all theaccommodation it contained: yet it was one of the largest andstateliest chambers in the mansion. A bed supported on massive pillarsof mahogany, hung with curtains of deep red damask, stood out like atabernacle in the centre; the two large windows, with their blindsalways drawn down, were half shrouded in festoons and falls of similardrapery; the carpet was red; the table at the foot of the bed wascovered with a crimson cloth; the walls were a soft fawn colour with ablush of pink in it; the wardrobe, the toilet-table, the chairs wereof darkly polished old mahogany. Out of these deep surroundingshades rose high, and glared white, the piled-up mattresses andpillows of the bed, spread with a snowy Marseilles counterpane.Scarcely less prominent was an ample cushioned easy-chair near thehead of the bed, also white, with a footstool before it; andlooking, as I thought, like a pale throne.

　　This room was chill, because it seldom had a fire; it was silent,because remote from the nursery and kitchen; solemn, because it wasknown to be so seldom entered. The housemaid alone came here onSaturdays, to wipe from the mirrors and the furniture a week's quietdust: and Mrs. Reed herself, at far intervals, visited it to reviewthe contents of a certain secret drawer in the wardrobe, where werestored divers parchments, her jewel-casket, and a miniature of herdeceased husband; and in those last words lies the secret of thered-room- the spell which kept it so lonely in spite of its grandeur.

　　Mr. Reed had been dead nine years: it was in this chamber hebreathed his last; here he lay in state; hence his coffin was borne bythe undertaker's men; and, since that day, a sense of drearyconsecration had guarded it from frequent intrusion.

　　My seat, to which Bessie and the bitter Miss Abbot had left meriveted, was a low ottoman near the marble chimney-piece; the bed rosebefore me; to my right hand there was the high, dark wardrobe, withsubdued, broken reflections varying the gloss of its panels; to myleft were the muffled windows; a great looking-glass between themrepeated the vacant majesty of the bed and room. I was not quitesure whether they had locked the door; and when I dared move, I got upand went to see. Alas! yes: no jail was ever more secure. Returning, Ihad to cross before the looking-glass; my fascinated glanceinvoluntarily explored the depth it revealed. All looked colder anddarker in that visionary hollow than in reality: and the strangelittle figure there gazing at me, with a white face and armsspecking the gloom, and glittering eyes of fear moving where allelse was still, had the effect of a real spirit: I thought it like oneof the tiny phantoms, half fairy, half imp, Bessie's evening storiesrepresented as coming out of lone, ferny dells in moors, and appearingbefore the eyes of belated travellers. I returned to my stool.

　　Superstition was with me at that moment; but it was not yet herhour for complete victory: my blood was still warm; the mood of therevolted slave was still bracing me with its bitter vigour; I had tostem a rapid rush of retrospective thought before I quailed to thedismal present.

　　All John Reed's violent tyrannies, all his sisters' proudindifference, all his mother's aversion, all the servants' partiality,turned up in my disturbed mind like a dark deposit in a turbid well.Why was I always suffering, always browbeaten, always accused, forever condemned? Why could I never please? Why was it useless to try towin any one's favour? Eliza, who, was headstrong and selfish, wasrespected. Georgiana, who had a spoiled temper, a very acrid spite,a captious and insolent carriage, was universally indulged. Herbeauty, her pink cheeks and golden curls, seemed to give delight toall who, looked at her, and to purchase indemnity for every fault.John no one thwarted, much less punished; though he twisted thenecks of the pigeons, killed the little pea-chicks, set the dogs atthe sheep, stripped the hothouse vines of their fruit, and broke thebuds off the choicest plants in the conservatory: he called his mother'old girl,' too; sometimes reviled her for her dark skin, similar tohis own; bluntly disregarded her wishes; not unfrequently tore andspoiled her silk attire; and he was still 'her own darling.' I daredcommit no fault: I strove to fulfil every duty; and I was termednaughty and tiresome, sullen and sneaking, from morning to noon, andfrom noon to night.

　　My head still ached and bled with the blow and fall I had received:no one had reproved John for wantonly striking me; and because I hadturned against him to avert farther irrational violence, I wasloaded with general opprobrium.

　　'Unjust!- unjust!' said my reason, forced by the agonising stimulusinto precocious though transitory power: and Resolve, equallywrought up, instigated some strange expedient to achieve escape frominsupportable oppression- as running away, or, if that could not beeffected, never eating or drinking more, and letting myself die.

　　What a consternation of soul was mine that dreary afternoon! Howall my brain was in tumult, and all my heart in insurrection! Yet inwhat darkness, what dense ignorance, was the mental battle fought! Icould not answer the ceaseless inward question- why I thus suffered;now, at the distance of- I will not say how many years, I see itclearly.

　　I was a discord in Gateshead Hall: I was like nobody there; I hadnothing in harmony with Mrs. Reed or her children, or her chosenvassalage. If they did not love me, in fact, as little did I lovethem. They were not bound to regard with affection a thing thatcould not sympathise with one amongst them; a heterogeneous thing,opposed to them in temperament, in capacity, in propensities; auseless thing, incapable of serving their interest, or adding to theirpleasure; a noxious thing, cherishing the germs of indignation attheir treatment, of contempt of their judgment. I know that had I beena sanguine, brilliant, careless, exacting, handsome, romping child-though equally dependent and friendless- Mrs. Reed would haveendured my presence more complacently; her children would haveentertained for me more of the cordiality of fellow-feeling; theservants would have been less prone to make me the scapegoat of thenursery.

　　Daylight began to forsake the red-room; it was past four o'clock,and the beclouded afternoon was tending to drear twilight. I heard therain still beating continuously on the staircase window, and thewind howling in the grove behind the hall; I grew by degrees cold as astone, and then my courage sank. My habitual mood of humiliation,self-doubt, forlorn depression, fell damp on the embers of my decayingire. All said I was wicked, and perhaps I might be so; what thoughthad I been but just conceiving of starving myself to death? Thatcertainly was a crime: and was I fit to die? Or was the vault underthe chancel of Gateshead Church an inviting bourne? In such vault Ihad been told did Mr. Reed lie buried; and led by this thought torecall his idea, I dwelt on it with gathering dread. I could notremember him; but I knew that he was my own uncle- my mother'sbrother- that he had taken me when a parentless infant to his house;and that in his last moments he had required a promise of Mrs. Reedthat she would rear and maintain me as one of her own children. Mrs.Reed probably considered she had kept this promise; and so she had,I dare say, as well as her nature would permit her; but how couldshe really like an interloper not of her race, and unconnected withher, after her husband's death, by any tie? It must have been mostirksome to find herself bound by a hard-wrung pledge to stand in thestead of a parent to a strange child she could not love, and to see anuncongenial alien permanently intruded on her own family group.

　　A singular notion dawned upon me. I doubted not- never doubted-that if Mr. Reed had been alive he would have treated me kindly; andnow, as I sat looking at the white bed and overshadowed walls-occasionally also turning a fascinated eye towards the dimlygleaming mirror- I began to recall what I had heard of dead men,troubled in their graves by the violation of their last wishes,revisiting the earth to punish the perjured and avenge theoppressed; and I thought Mr. Reed's spirit, harassed by the wrongsof his sister's child, might quit its abode- whether in the churchvault or in the unknown world of the departed- and rise before me inthis chamber. I wiped my tears and hushed my sobs, fearful lest anysign of violent grief might waken a preternatural voice to comfort me,or elicit from the gloom some haloed face, bending over me withstrange pity. This idea, consolatory in theory, I felt would beterrible if realised: with all my might I endeavoured to stifle it-I endeavoured to be firm. Shaking my hair from my eyes, I lifted myhead and tried to look boldly round the dark room; at this moment alight gleamed on the wall. Was it, I asked myself, a ray from the moonpenetrating some aperture in the blind? No; moonlight was still, andthis stirred; while I gazed, it glided up to the ceiling andquivered over my head. I can now conjecture readily that this streakof light was, in all likelihood, a gleam from a lantern carried bysome one across the lawn: but then, prepared as my mind was forhorror, shaken as my nerves were by agitation, I thought the swiftdarting beam was a herald of some coming vision from another world. Myheart beat thick, my head grew hot; a sound filled my ears, which Ideemed the rushing of wings; something seemed near me; I wasoppressed, suffocated: endurance broke down; I rushed to the doorand shook the lock in desperate effort. Steps came running along theouter passage; the key turned, Bessie and Abbot entered.

　　'Miss Eyre, are you ill?' said Bessie.

　　'What a dreadful noise! it went quite through me!' exclaimed Abbot.

　　'Take me out! Let me go into the nursery!' was my cry.

　　'What for? Are you hurt? Have you seen something?' again demandedBessie.

　　'Oh! I saw a light, and I thought a ghost would come.' I had nowgot hold of Bessie's hand, and she did not snatch it from me.

　　'She has screamed out on purpose,' declared Abbot, in some disgust.'And what a scream! If she had been in great pain one would haveexcused it, but she only wanted to bring us all here: I know hernaughty tricks.'

　　'What is all this?' demanded another voice peremptorily; and Mrs.Reed came along the corridor, her cap flying wide, her gown rustlingstormily. 'Abbot and Bessie, I believe I gave orders that Jane Eyreshould be left in the red-room till I came to her myself.'

　　'Miss Jane screamed so loud, ma'am,' pleaded Bessie.

　　'Let her go,' was the only answer. 'Loose Bessie's hand, child: youcannot succeed in getting out by these means, be assured. I abhorartifice, particularly in children; it is my duty to show you thattricks will not answer: you will now stay here an hour longer, andit is only on condition of perfect submission and stillness that Ishall liberate you then.'

　　'O aunt! have pity! forgive me! I cannot endure it- let me bepunished some other way! I shall be killed if-'

　　'Silence! This violence is all most repulsive:' and so, no doubt,she felt it. I was a precocious actress in her eyes; she sincerely.looked on me as a compound of virulent passions, mean spirit, anddangerous duplicity.

　　Bessie and Abbot having retreated, Mrs. Reed, impatient of my nowfrantic anguish and wild sobs, abruptly thrust me back and locked mein, without farther parley. I heard her sweeping away; and soonafter she was gone, I suppose I had a species of fit:unconsciousness closed the scene.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER III

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　THE next thing I remember is, waking up with a feeling as if Ihad had a frightful nightmare, and seeing before me a terrible redglare, crossed with thick black bars. I heard voices, too, speakingwith a hollow sound, and as if muffled by a rush of wind or water:agitation, uncertainty, and an all-predominating sense of terrorconfused my faculties. Ere long, I became aware that some one washandling me; lifting me up and supporting me in a sitting posture, andthat more tenderly than I had ever been raised or upheld before. Irested my head against a pillow or an arm, and felt easy.

　　In five minutes more the cloud of bewilderment dissolved: I knewquite well that I was in my own bed, and that the red glare was thenursery fire. It was night: a candle burnt on the table; Bessiestood at the bed-foot with a basin in her hand, and a gentleman sat ina chair near my pillow, leaning over me.

　　I felt an inexpressible relief, a soothing conviction of protectionand security, when I knew that there was a stranger in the room, anindividual not belonging to Gateshead, and not related to Mrs. Reed.Turning from Bessie (though her presence was far less obnoxious tome than that of Abbot, for instance, would have been), I scrutinisedthe face of the gentleman: I knew him; it was Mr. Lloyd, anapothecary, sometimes called in by Mrs. Reed when the servants wereailing: for herself and the children she employed a physician.

　　'Well, who am I?' he asked.

　　I pronounced his name, offering him at the same time my hand: hetook it, smiling and saying, 'We shall do very well by and by.' Thenhe laid me down, and addressing Bessie, charged her to be very carefulthat I was not disturbed during the night. Having given some furtherdirections, and intimated that he should call again the next day, hedeparted; to my grief: I felt so sheltered and befriended while he satin the chair near my pillow; and as he closed the door after him,all the room darkened and my heart again sank: inexpressible sadnessweighed it down.

　　'Do you feel as if you should sleep, Miss?' asked Bessie, rathersoftly.

　　Scarcely dared I answer her; for I feared the next sentence mightbe rough. 'I will try.'

　　'Would you like to drink, or could you eat anything?'

　　'No, thank you, Bessie.'

　　'Then I think I shall go to bed, for it is past twelve o'clock; butyou may call me if you want anything in the night.'

　　Wonderful civility this! It emboldened me to ask a question.

　　'Bessie, what is the matter with me? Am I ill?'

　　'You fell sick, I suppose, in the red-room with crying; you'll bebetter soon, no doubt.'

　　Bessie went into the housemaid's apartment, which was near. I heardher say-

　　'Sarah, come and sleep with me in the nursery; I daren't for mylife be alone with that poor child tonight: she might die; it's such astrange thing she should have that fit: I wonder if she sawanything. Missis was rather too hard.'

　　Sarah came back with her; they both went to bed; they werewhispering together for half an hour before they fell asleep. I caughtscraps of their conversation, from which I was able only toodistinctly to infer the main subject discussed.

　　'Something passed her, all dressed in white, and vanished'- 'Agreat black dog behind him'- 'Three loud raps on the chamber door'-'A light in the churchyard just over his grave,' etc., etc.

　　At last both slept: the fire and the candle went out. For me, thewatches of that long night passed in ghastly wakefulness; ear, eye,and mind were alike strained by dread: such dread as children only canfeel.

　　No severe or prolonged bodily illness followed this incident of thered-room; it only gave my nerves a shock of which I feel thereverberation to this day. Yes, Mrs. Reed, to you I owe some fearfulpangs of mental suffering, but I ought to forgive you, for you knewnot what you did: while rending my heart-strings, you thought you wereonly uprooting my bad propensities.

　　Next day, by noon, I was up and dressed, and sat wrapped in a shawlby the nursery hearth. I felt physically weak and broken down: butmy worse ailment was an unutterable wretchedness of mind: awretchedness which kept drawing from me silent tears; no sooner hadI wiped one salt drop from my cheek than another followed. Yet, Ithought, I ought to have been happy, for none of the Reeds were there,they were all gone out in the carriage with their mama. Abbot, too,was sewing in another room, and Bessie, as she moved hither andthither, putting away toys and arranging drawers, addressed to meevery now and then a word of unwonted kindness. This state of thingsshould have been to me a paradise of peace, accustomed as I was to alife of ceaseless reprimand and thankless fagging; but, in fact, myracked nerves were now in such a state that no calm could soothe,and no pleasure excite them agreeably.

　　Bessie had been down into the kitchen, and she brought up withher a tart on a certain brightly painted china plate, whose bird ofparadise, nestling in a wreath of convolvuli and rosebuds, had beenwont to stir in me a most enthusiastic sense of admiration; andwhich plate I had often petitioned to be allowed to take in my hand inorder to examine it more closely, but had always hitherto beendeemed unworthy of such a privilege. This precious vessel was nowplaced on my knee, and I was cordially invited to eat the circlet ofdelicate pastry upon it. Vain favour! coming, like most otherfavours long deferred and often wished for, too late! I could noteat the tart; and the plumage of the bird, the tints of the flowers,seemed strangely faded: I put both plate and tart away. Bessie askedif I would have a book: the word book acted as a transient stimulus,and I begged her to fetch Gulliver's Travels from the library. Thisbook I had again and again perused with delight. I considered it anarrative of facts, and discovered in it a vein of interest deeperthan what I found in fairy tales: for as to the elves, having soughtthem in vain among fox-glove leaves and bells, under mushrooms andbeneath the ground-ivy mantling old wall-nooks, I had at length madeup my mind to the sad truth, that they were all gone out of England tosome savage country where the woods were wilder and thicker, and thepopulation more scant; whereas, Lilliput and Brobdingnag being, inmy creed, solid parts of the earth's surface, I doubted not that Imight one day, by taking a long voyage, see with my own eyes thelittle fields, houses, and trees, the diminutive people, the tinycows, sheep, and birds of the one realm; and the corn-fields,forest-high, the mighty mastiffs, the monster cats, the tower-like menand women, of the other. Yet, when this cherished volume was nowplaced in my hand- when I turned over its leaves, and sought in itsmarvellous pictures the charm I had, till now, never failed to find-all was eerie and dreary; the giants were gaunt goblins, the pigmiesmalevolent and fearful imps, Gulliver a most desolate wanderer in mostdread and dangerous regions. I closed the book, which I dared nolonger peruse, and put it on the table, beside the untasted tart.

　　Bessie had now finished dusting and tidying the room, and havingwashed her hands, she opened a certain little drawer, full of splendidshreds of silk and satin, and began making a new bonnet forGeorgiana's doll. Meantime she sang: her song was-

　　'In the days when we were gipsying,

　　A long time ago.'

　　I had often heard the song before, and always with livelydelight; for Bessie had a sweet voice,- at least, I thought so. Butnow, though her voice was still sweet, I found in its melody anindescribable sadness. Sometimes, preoccupied with her work, shesang the refrain very low, very lingeringly; 'A long time ago' cameout like the saddest cadence of a funeral hymn. She passed intoanother ballad, this time a really doleful one.

　　'My feet they are sore, and my limbs they are weary;

　　Long is the way, and the mountains are wild;

　　Soon will the twilight close moonless and dreary

　　Over the path of the poor orphan child.

　　Why did they send me so far and so lonely,

　　Up where the moors spread and grey rocks are piled?

　　Men are hard-hearted, and kind angels only

　　Watch o'er the steps of a poor orphan child.

　　Yet distant and soft the night breeze is blowing,

　　Clouds there are none, and clear stars beam mild,

　　God, in His mercy, protection is showing,

　　Comfort and hope to the poor orphan child.

　　Ev'n should I fall o'er the broken bridge passing,

　　Or stray in the marshes, by false lights beguiled,

　　Still will my Father, with promise and blessing,

　　Take to His bosom the poor orphan child.

　　There is a thought that for strength should avail me,

　　Though both of shelter and kindred despoiled;

　　Heaven is a home, and a rest will not fail me;

　　God is a friend to the poor orphan child.'

　　'Come, Miss Jane, don't cry,' said Bessie as she finished. Shemight as well have said to the fire, 'don't burn!' but how could shedivine the morbid suffering to which I was a prey? In the course ofthe morning Mr. Lloyd came again.

　　'What, already up!' said he, as he entered the nursery. 'Well,nurse, how is she?'

　　Bessie answered that I was doing very well.

　　'Then she ought to look more cheerful. Come here, Mis Jane: yourname is Jane, is it not?'

　　'Yes, sir, Jane Eyre.'

　　'Well, you have been crying, Miss Jane Eyre; can you tell me whatabout? Have you any pain?'

　　'No, sir.'

　　'Oh! I daresay she is crying because she could not go out withMissis in the carriage,' interposed Bessie.

　　'Surely not! why, she is too old for such pettishness.'

　　I thought so too; and my self-esteem being wounded by the falsecharge, I answered promptly, 'I never cried for such a thing in mylife: I hate going out in the carriage. I cry because I am miserable.'

　　'Oh fie, Miss!' said Bessie.

　　The good apothecary appeared a little puzzled. I was standingbefore him; he fixed his eyes on me very steadily: his eyes were smalland grey; not very bright, but I daresay I should think them shrewdnow: he had a hard-featured yet good-natured looking face. Havingconsidered me at leisure, he said-

　　'What made you ill yesterday?'

　　'She had a fall,' said Bessie, again putting in her word.

　　'Fall! why, that is like a baby again! Can't she manage to walkat her age? She must be eight or nine years old.'

　　'I was knocked down,' was the blunt explanation, jerked out of meby another pang of mortified pride; 'but that did not make me ill,'I added; while Mr. Lloyd helped himself to a pinch of snuff.

　　As he was returning the box to his waistcoat pocket, a loud bellrang for the servants' dinner; he knew what it was. 'That's for you,nurse,' said he; 'you can go down; I'll give Miss Jane a lecturetill you come back.'

　　Bessie would rather have stayed, but she was obliged to go, becausepunctuality at meals was rigidly enforced at Gates-head Hall.

　　'The fall did not make you ill; what did, then?' pursued Mr.Lloyd when Bessie was gone.

　　'I was shut up in a room where there is a ghost till after dark.'

　　I saw Mr. Lloyd smile and frown at the same time. 'Ghost! What, youare a baby after all! You are afraid of ghosts?'

　　'Of Mr. Reed's ghost I am: he died in that room, and was laid outthere. Neither Bessie nor any one else will go into it at night, ifthey can help it; and it was cruel to shut me up alone without acandle,- so cruel that I think I shall never forget it.'

　　'Nonsense! And is it that makes you so miserable? Are you afraidnow in daylight?'

　　'No: but night will come again before long: and besides,- I amunhappy,- very unhappy, for other things.'

　　'What other things? Can you tell me some of them?'

　　How much I wished to reply fully to this question! How difficult itwas to frame any answer! Children can feel, but they cannot analysetheir feelings; and if the analysis is partially effected inthought, they know not how to express the result of the process inwords. Fearful, however, of losing this first and only opportunityof relieving my grief by imparting it, I, after a disturbed pause,contrived to frame a meagre, though, as far as it went, true response.

　　'For one thing, I have no father or mother, brothers or sisters.'

　　'You have a kind aunt and cousins.'

　　Again I paused; then bunglingly enounced-

　　'But John Reed knocked me down, and my aunt shut me up in thered-room.'

　　Mr. Lloyd a second time produced his snuff-box.

　　'Don't you think Gateshead Hall a very beautiful house?' askedhe. 'Are you not very thankful to have such a fine place to live at?'

　　'It is not my house, sir; and Abbot says I have less right to behere than a servant.'

　　'Pooh! you can't be silly enough to wish to leave such a splendidplace?'

　　'If I had anywhere else to go, I should be glad to leave it; butI can never get away from Gateshead till I am a woman.'

　　'Perhaps you may- who knows? Have you any relations besides Mrs.Reed?'

　　'I think not, sir.'

　　'None belonging to your father?'

　　'I don't know: I asked Aunt Reed once, and she said possibly Imight have some poor, low relations called Eyre, but she knewnothing about them.'

　　'If you had such, would you like to go to them?'

　　I reflected. Poverty looks grim to grown people; still more so tochildren: they have not much idea of industrious, working, respectablepoverty; they think of the word only as connected with ragged clothes,scanty food, fireless grates, rude manners, and debasing vices:poverty for me was synonymous with degradation.

　　'No; I should not like to belong to poor people,' was my reply.

　　'Not even if they were kind to you?'

　　I shook my head: I could not see how poor people had the means ofbeing kind; and then to learn to speak like them, to adopt theirmanners, to be uneducated, to grow up like one of the poor women I sawsometimes nursing their children or washing their clothes at thecottage doors of the village of Gateshead: no, I was not heroic enoughto purchase liberty at the price of caste.

　　'But are your relatives so very poor? Are they working people?'

　　'I cannot tell; Aunt Reed says if I have any, they must be abeggarly set: I should not like to go a-begging.'

　　'Would you like to go to school?'

　　Again I reflected: I scarcely knew what school was: Bessiesometimes spoke of it as a place where young ladies sat in the stocks,wore backboards, and were expected to be exceedingly genteel andprecise: John Reed hated his school, and abused his master; but JohnReed's tastes were no rule for mine, and if Bessie's accounts ofschool-discipline (gathered from the young ladies of a family whereshe had lived before coming to Gateshead) were somewhat appalling, herdetails of certain accomplishments attained by these same young ladieswere, I thought, equally attractive. She boasted of beautifulpaintings of landscapes and flowers by them executed; of songs theycould sing and pieces they could play, of purses they could net, ofFrench books they could translate; till my spirit was moved toemulation as I listened. Besides, school would be a complete change:it implied a long journey, an entire separation from Gateshead, anentrance into a new life.

　　'I should indeed like to go to school,' was the audibleconclusion of my musings.

　　'Well, well! who knows what may happen?' said Mr. Lloyd, as hegot up. 'The child ought to have change of air and scene,' he added,speaking to himself; 'nerves not in a good state.'

　　Bessie now returned; at the same moment the carriage was heardrolling up the gravel-walk.

　　'Is that your mistress, nurse?' asked Mr. Lloyd. 'I should liketo speak to her before I go.'

　　Bessie invited him to walk into the breakfast-room, and led the wayout. In the interview which followed between him and Mrs. Reed, Ipresume, from after-occurrences, that the apothecary ventured torecommend my being sent to school; and the recommendation was no doubtreadily enough adopted; for as Abbot said, in discussing the subjectwith Bessie when both sat sewing in the nursery one night, after I wasin bed, and, as they thought, asleep, 'Missis was, she dared say, gladenough to get rid of such a tiresome, ill-conditioned child, whoalways looked as if she were watching everybody, and scheming plotsunderhand.' Abbot, I think, gave me credit for being a sort ofinfantine Guy Fawkes.

　　On that same occasion I learned, for the first time, from MissAbbot's communications to Bessie, that my father had been a poorclergyman; that my mother had married him against the wishes of herfriends, who considered the match beneath her; that my grandfatherReed was so irritated at her disobedience, he cut her off without ashilling; that after my mother and father had been married a year, thelatter caught the typhus fever while visiting among the poor of alarge manufacturing town where his curacy was situated, and where thatdisease was then prevalent: that my mother took the infection fromhim, and both died within a month of each other.

　　Bessie, when she heard this narrative, sighed and said, 'PoorMiss Jane is to be pitied too, Abbot.'

　　'Yes,' responded Abbot; 'if she were a nice, pretty child, onemight compassionate her forlornness; but one really cannot care forsuch a little toad as that.'

　　'Not a great deal, to be sure,' agreed Bessie: 'at any rate, abeauty like Miss Georgiana would be more moving in the samecondition.'

　　'Yes, I doat on Miss Georgiana!' cried the fervent Abbot. 'Littledarling!- with her long curls and her blue eyes, and such a sweetcolour as she has; just as if she were painted!- Bessie, I could fancya Welsh rabbit for supper.'

　　'So could I- with a roast onion. Come, we'll go down.' They went.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER IV

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　FROM my discourse with Mr. Lloyd, and from the above reportedconference between Bessie and Abbot, I gathered enough of hope tosuffice as a motive for wishing to get well: a change seemed near,-I desired and waited it in silence. It tarried, however: days andweeks passed: I had regained my normal state of health, but no newallusion was made to the subject over which I brooded. Mrs. Reedsurveyed me at times with a severe eye, but seldom addressed me: sincemy illness, she had drawn a more marked line of separation than everbetween me and her own children; appointing me a small closet to sleepin by myself, condemning me to take my meals alone, and pass all mytime in the nursery, while my cousins were constantly in thedrawing-room. Not a hint, however, did she drop about sending me toschool: still I felt an instinctive certainty that she would notlong endure me under the same roof with her; for her glance, nowmore than ever, when turned on me, expressed an insuperable and rootedaversion.

　　Eliza and Georgiana, evidently acting according to orders, spoke tome as little as possible: John thrust his tongue in his cheek wheneverhe saw me, and once attempted chastisement; but as I instantlyturned against him, roused by the same sentiment of deep ire anddesperate revolt which had stirred my corruption before, he thought itbetter to desist, and ran from me uttering execrations, and vowing Ihad burst his nose. I had indeed levelled at that prominent feature ashard a blow as my knuckles could inflict; and when I saw that eitherthat or my look daunted him, I had the greatest inclination tofollow up my advantage to purpose; but he was already with his mama. Iheard him in a blubbering tone commence the tale of how 'that nastyJane Eyre' had flown at him like a mad cat: he was stopped ratherharshly-

　　'Don't talk to me about her, John: I told you not to go near her;she is not worthy of notice; I do not choose that either you or yoursisters should associate with her.'

　　Here, leaning over the banister, I cried out suddenly, andwithout at all deliberating on my words-

　　'They are not fit to associate with me.'

　　Mrs. Reed was rather a stout woman; but, on hearing this strangeand audacious declaration, she ran nimbly up the stair, swept melike a whirlwind into the nursery, and crushing me down on the edge ofmy crib, dared me in an emphatic voice to rise from that place, orutter one syllable during the remainder of the day.

　　'What would Uncle Reed say to you, if he were alive?' was myscarcely voluntary demand. I say scarcely voluntary, for it seemedas if my tongue pronounced words, without my will consenting totheir utterance: something spoke out of me over which I had nocontrol.

　　'What?' said Mrs. Reed under her breath: her usually coldcomposed grey eye became troubled with a look like fear; she tookher hand from my arm, and gazed at me as if she really did not knowwhether I were child or fiend. I was now in for it.

　　'My Uncle Reed is in heaven, and can see all you do and think;and so can papa and mama: they know how you shut me up all day long,and how you wish me dead.'

　　Mrs. Reed soon rallied her spirits: she shook me most soundly,she boxed both my ears, and then left me without a word. Bessiesupplied the hiatus by a homily of an hour's length, in which sheproved beyond a doubt that I was the most wicked and abandoned childever reared under a roof. I half believed her; for I felt indeedonly bad feelings surging in my breast.

　　November, December, and half of January passed away. Christmasand the New Year had been celebrated at Gateshead with the usualfestive cheer; presents had been interchanged, dinners and eveningparties given. From every enjoyment I was, of course, excluded: myshare of the gaiety consisted in witnessing the daily apparelling ofEliza and Georgiana, and seeing them descend to the drawing-room,dressed out in thin muslin frocks and scarlet sashes, with hairelaborately ringleted; and afterwards, in listening to the sound ofthe piano or the harp played below, to the passing to and fro of thebutler and footman, to the jingling of glass and china as refreshmentswere handed, to the broken hum of conversation as the drawing-roomdoor opened and closed. When tired of this occupation, I wouldretire from the stair-head to the solitary and silent nursery:there, though somewhat sad, I was not miserable. To speak truth, I hadnot the least wish to go into company, for in company I was veryrarely noticed; and if Bessie had but been kind and companionable, Ishould have deemed it a treat to spend the evenings quietly withher, instead of passing them under the formidable eye of Mrs. Reed, ina room full of ladies and gentlemen. But Bessie, as soon as she haddressed her young ladies, used to take herself off to the livelyregions of the kitchen and housekeeper's room, generally bearing thecandle along with her. I then sat with my doll on my knee till thefire got low, glancing round occasionally to make sure that nothingworse than myself haunted the shadowy room; and when the embers sankto a dull red, I undressed hastily, tugging at knots and strings asI best might, and sought shelter from cold and darkness in my crib. Tothis crib I always took my doll; human beings must love something,and, in the dearth of worthier objects of affection, I contrived tofind a pleasure in loving and cherishing a faded graven image,shabby as a miniature scarecrow. It puzzles me now to remember withwhat absurd sincerity I doated on this little toy, half fancying italive and capable of sensation. I could not sleep unless it was foldedin my night-gown; and when it lay there safe and warm, I wascomparatively happy, believing it to be happy likewise.

　　Long did the hours seem while I waited the departure of thecompany, and listened for the sound of Bessie's step on the stairs:sometimes she would come up in the interval to seek her thimble or herscissors, or perhaps to bring me something by way of supper- a bunor a cheese-cake- then she would sit on the bed while I ate it, andwhen I had finished, she would tuck the clothes round me, and twiceshe kissed me, and said, 'Good night, Miss Jane.' When thus gentle,Bessie seemed to me the best, prettiest, kindest being in the world;and I wished most intensely that she would always be so pleasant andamiable, and never push me about, or scold, or task me unreasonably,as she was too often wont to do. Bessie, Lee must, I think, havebeen a girl of good natural capacity, for she was smart in all shedid, and had a remarkable knack of narrative; so, at least, I judgefrom the impression made on me by her nursery tales. She was prettytoo, if my recollections of her face and person are correct. Iremember her as a slim young woman, with black hair, dark eyes, verynice features, and good, clear complexion; but she had a capriciousand hasty temper, and indifferent ideas of principle or justice:still, such as she was, I preferred her to any one else at GatesheadHall.

　　It was the fifteenth of January, about nine o'clock in the morning:Bessie was gone down to breakfast; my cousins had not yet beensummoned to their mama; Eliza was putting on her bonnet and warmgarden-coat to go and feed her poultry, an occupation of which she wasfond: and not less so of selling the eggs to the housekeeper andhoarding up the money she thus obtained. She had a turn for traffic,and a marked propensity for saving; shown not only in the vending ofeggs and chickens, but also in driving hard bargains with the gardenerabout flower-roots, seeds, and slips of plants; that functionaryhaving orders from Mrs. Reed to buy of his young lady all the productsof her parterre she wished to sell: and Eliza would have sold the hairoff her head if she could have made a handsome profit thereby. As toher money, she first secreted it in odd corners, wrapped in a rag oran old curl-paper; but some of these hoards having been discoveredby the housemaid, Eliza, fearful of one day losing her valuedtreasure, consented to intrust it to her mother, at a usurious rate ofinterest- fifty or sixty per cent.; which interest she exacted everyquarter, keeping her accounts in a little book with anxious accuracy.

　　Georgiana sat on a high stool, dressing her hair at the glass,and interweaving her curls with artificial flowers and faded feathers,of which she had found a store in a drawer in the attic. I wasmaking my bed, having received strict orders from Bessie to get itarranged before she returned, (for Bessie now frequently employed meas a sort of under-nurserymaid, to tidy the room, dust the chairs,etc.). Having spread the quilt and folded my night-dress, I went tothe window-seat to put in order some picture-books and doll's housefurniture scattered there; an abrupt command from Georgiana to let herplaythings alone (for the tiny chairs and mirrors, the fairy platesand cups, were her property) stopped my proceedings; and then, forlack of other occupation, I fell to breathing on the frost-flowerswith which the window was fretted, and thus clearing a space in theglass through which I might look out on the grounds, where all wasstill and petrified under the influence of a hard frost.

　　From this window were visible the porter's lodge and thecarriage-road, and just as I had dissolved so much of the silver-whitefoliage veiling the panes as left room to look out, I saw the gatesthrown open and a carriage roll through. I watched it ascending thedrive with indifference; carriages often came to Gateshead, but noneever brought visitors in whom I was interested; it stopped in front ofthe house, the door-bell rang loudly, the new-comer was admitted.All this being nothing to me, my vacant attention soon foundlivelier attraction in the spectacle of a little hungry robin, whichcame and chirruped on the twigs of the leafless cherry-tree nailedagainst the wall near the casement. The remains of my breakfast ofbread and milk stood on the table, and having crumbled a morsel ofroll, I was tugging at the sash to put out the crumbs on thewindow-sill, when Bessie came running upstairs into the nursery.

　　'Miss Jane, take off your pinafore; what are you doing there?Have you washed your hands and face this morning?' I gave anothertug before I answered, for I wanted the bird to be secure of itsbread: the sash yielded; I scattered the crumbs, some on the stonesill, some on the cherry-tree bough, then, closing the window, Ireplied-

　　'No, Bessie; I have only just finished dusting.'

　　'Troublesome, careless child! and what are you doing now? Youlook quite red, as if you have been about some mischief: what were youopening the window for?'

　　I was spared the trouble of answering, for Bessie seemed in toogreat a hurry to listen to explanations; she hauled me to thewashstand, inflicted a merciless, but happily brief scrub on my faceand hands with soap, water, and a coarse towel; disciplined my headwith a bristly brush, denuded me of my pinafore, and then hurryingme to the top of the stairs, bid me go down directly, as I waswanted in the breakfast-room.

　　I would have asked who wanted me: I would have demanded if Mrs.Reed was there; but Bessie was already gone, and had closed thenursery-door upon me. I slowly descended. For nearly three months, Ihad never been called to Mrs. Reed's presence; restricted so long tothe nursery, the breakfast, dining, and drawing-rooms were becomefor me awful regions, on which it dismayed me to intrude.

　　I now stood in the empty hall; before me was the breakfast-roomdoor, and I stopped, intimidated and trembling. What a miserablelittle poltroon had fear, engendered of unjust punishment, made ofme in those days! I feared to return to the nursery, and feared togo forward to the parlour; ten minutes I stood in agitated hesitation;the vehement ringing of the breakfast-room bell decided me; I mustenter.

　　'Who could want me?' I asked inwardly, as with both hands Iturned the stiff door-handle, which, for a second or two, resistedmy efforts. 'What should I see besides Aunt Reed in the apartment?-a man or a woman?' The handle turned, the door unclosed, and passingthrough and curtseying low, I looked up at- a black pillar!- such,at least, appeared to me, at first sight, the straight, narrow,sable-clad shape standing erect on the rug: the grim face at the topwas like a carved mask, placed above the shaft by way of capital.

　　Mrs. Reed occupied her usual seat by the fireside; she made asignal to me to approach; I did so, and she introduced me to the stonystranger with the words: 'This is the little girl respecting whom Iapplied to you.'

　　He, for it was a man, turned his head slowly towards where I stood,and having examined me with the two inquisitive-looking grey eyeswhich twinkled under a pair of bushy brows, said solemnly, and in abass voice, 'Her size is small: what is her age?'

　　'Ten years.'

　　'So much?' was the doubtful answer; and he prolonged his scrutinyfor some minutes. Presently he addressed me-

　　'Your name, little girl?'

　　'Jane Eyre, sir.'

　　In uttering these words I looked up: he seemed to me a tallgentleman; but then I was very little; his features were large, andthey and all the lines of his frame were equally harsh and prim.

　　'Well, Jane Eyre, and are you a good child?'

　　Impossible to reply to this in the affirmative: my little worldheld a contrary opinion: I was silent. Mrs. Reed answered for me by anexpressive shake of the head, adding soon, 'Perhaps the less said onthat subject the better, Mr. Brocklehurst.'

　　'Sorry indeed to hear it! she and I must have some talk;' andbending from the perpendicular, he installed his person in thearm-chair opposite Mrs. Reed's. 'Come here,' he said.

　　I stepped across the rug; he placed me square and straight beforehim. What a face he had, now that it was almost on a level withmine! what a great nose! and what a mouth! and what large prominentteeth!

　　'No sight so sad as that of a naughty child,' he began, 'especiallya naughty little girl. Do you know where the wicked go after death?'

　　'They go to hell,' was my ready and orthodox answer.

　　'And what is hell? Can you tell me that?'

　　'A pit full of fire.'

　　'And should you like to fall into that pit, and to be burning therefor ever?'

　　'No, sir.'

　　'What must you do to avoid it?'

　　I deliberated a moment; my answer, when it did come, wasobjectionable: 'I must keep in good health, and not die.'

　　'How can you keep in good health? Children younger than you diedaily. I buried a little child of five years old only a day or twosince,- a good little child, whose soul is now in heaven. It is tobe feared the same could not be said of you were you to be calledhence.'

　　Not being in a condition to remove his doubt, I only cast my eyesdown on the two large feet planted on the rug, and sighed, wishingmyself far enough away.

　　'I hope that sigh is from the heart, and that you repent of everhaving been the occasion of discomfort to your excellentbenefactress.'

　　'Benefactress! benefactress!' said I inwardly: 'they all callMrs. Reed my benefactress; if so, a benefactress is a disagreeablething.'

　　'Do you say your prayers night and morning?' continued myinterrogator.

　　'Yes, sir.'

　　'Do you read your Bible?'

　　'Sometimes.'

　　'With pleasure? Are you fond of it?'

　　'I like Revelations, and the book of Daniel, and Genesis andSamuel, and a little bit of Exodus, and some parts of Kings andChronicles, and Job and Jonah.'

　　'And the Psalms? I hope you like them?'

　　'No, sir.'

　　'No? oh, shocking! I have a little boy, younger than you, who knowssix Psalms by heart: and when you ask him which he would ratherhave, a gingerbread-nut to eat or a verse of a Psalm to learn, hesays: "Oh! the verse of a Psalm! angels sing Psalms;" says he, "I wishto be a little angel here below;" he then gets two nuts inrecompense for his infant piety.'

　　'Psalms are not interesting,' I remarked.

　　'That proves you have a wicked heart; and you must pray to God tochange it: to give you a new and clean one: to take away your heart ofstone and give you a heart of flesh.'

　　I was about to propound a question, touching the manner in whichthat operation of changing my heart was to be performed, when Mrs.Reed interposed, telling me to sit down; she then proceeded to carryon the conversation herself.

　　'Mr. Brocklehurst, I believe I intimated in the letter which Iwrote to you three weeks ago, that this little girl has not quitethe character and disposition I could wish: should you admit herinto Lowood school, I should be glad if the superintendent andteachers were requested to keep a strict eye on her, and, above all,to guard against her worst fault, a tendency to deceit. I mention thisin your hearing, Jane, that you may not attempt to impose on Mr.Brocklehurst.'

　　Well might I dread, well might I dislike Mrs. Reed; for it washer nature to wound me cruelly; never was I happy in her presence;however carefully I obeyed, however strenuously I strove to pleaseher, my efforts were still repulsed and repaid by such sentences asthe above. Now, uttered before a stranger, the accusation cut me tothe heart; I dimly perceived that she was already obliterating hopefrom the new phase of existence which she destined me to enter; Ifelt, though I could not have expressed the feeling, that she wassowing aversion and unkindness along my future path; I saw myselftransformed under Mr. Brocklehurst's eye into an artful, noxiouschild, and what could I do to remedy the injury?

　　'Nothing, indeed,' thought I, as I struggled to repress a sob,and hastily wiped away some tears, the impotent evidences of myanguish.

　　'Deceit is, indeed, a sad fault in a child,' said Mr. Brocklehurst;'it is akin to falsehood, and all liars will have their portion in thelake burning with fire and brimstone; she shall, however, bewatched, Mrs. Reed. I will speak to Miss Temple and the teachers.'

　　'I should wish her to be brought up in a manner suiting herprospects,' continued my benefactress; 'to be made useful, to bekept humble: as for the vacations, she will, with your permission,spend them always at Lowood.'

　　'Your decisions are perfectly judicious, madam,' returned Mr.Brocklehurst. 'Humility is a Christian grace, and one peculiarlyappropriate to the pupils of Lowood; I, therefore, direct thatespecial care shall be bestowed on its cultivation amongst them. Ihave studied how best to mortify in them the worldly sentiment ofpride; and, only the other day, I had a pleasing proof of mysuccess. My second daughter, Augusta, went with her mama to visitthe school, and on her return she exclaimed: "Oh, dear papa, how quietand plain all the girls at Lowood look, with their hair combedbehind their ears, and their long pinafores, and those littleholland pockets outside their frocks- they are almost like poorpeople's children! and," said she, "they looked at my dress andmama's, as if they had never seen a silk gown before."'

　　'This is the state of things I quite approve,' returned Mrs.Reed; 'had I sought all England over, I could scarcely have found asystem more exactly fitting a child like Jane Eyre. Consistency, mydear Mr. Brocklehurst; I advocate consistency in all things.'

　　'Consistency, madam, is the first of Christian duties; and it hasbeen observed in every arrangement connected with the establishment ofLowood: plain fare, simple attire, unsophisticated accommodations,hardy and active habits; such is the order of the day in the house andits inhabitants.'

　　'Quite right, sir. I may then depend upon this child being receivedas a pupil at Lowood, and there being trained in conformity to herposition and prospects?'

　　'Madam, you may: she shall be placed in that nursery of chosenplants, and I trust she will show herself grateful for the inestimableprivilege of her election.'

　　'I will send her, then, as soon as possible, Mr. Brocklehurst; for,I assure you, I feel anxious to be relieved of a responsibility thatwas becoming too irksome.'

　　'No doubt, no doubt, madam; and now I wish you good morning. Ishall return to Brocklehurst Hall in the course of a week or two: mygood friend, the Archdeacon, will not permit me to leave him sooner. Ishall send Miss Temple notice that she is to expect a new girl, sothat there will be no difficulty about receiving her. Good-bye.'

　　'Good-bye, Mr. Brocklehurst; remember me to Mrs. and MissBrocklehurst, and to Augusta and Theodore, and Master BroughtonBrocklehurst.'

　　'I will, madam. Little girl, here is a book entitled the Child'sGuide; read it with prayer, especially that part containing "Anaddicted to falsehood and deceit."'

　　With these words Mr. Brocklehurst put into my hand a thinpamphlet sewn in a cover, and having rung for his carriage, hedeparted.

　　Mrs. Reed and I were left alone: some minutes passed in silence;she was sewing, I was watching her. Mrs. Reed might be at that timesome six or seven and thirty; she was a woman of robust frame,square-shouldered and strong-limbed, not tall, and, though stout,not obese: she had a somewhat large face, the under jaw being muchdeveloped and very solid; her brow was low, her chin large andprominent, mouth and nose sufficiently regular; under her lighteyebrows glimmered an eye devoid of ruth; her skin was dark andopaque, her hair nearly flaxen; her constitution was sound as abell- illness never came near her; she was an exact, clever manager;her household and tenantry were thoroughly under her control; herchildren only at times defied her authority and laughed it to scorn;she dressed well, and had a presence and port calculated to set offhandsome attire.

　　Sitting on a low stool, a few yards from her arm-chair, Iexamined her figure; I perused her features. In my hand I held thetract containing the sudden death of the Liar, to which narrative myattention had been pointed as to an appropriate warning. What had justpassed; what Mrs. Reed had said concerning me to Mr. Brocklehurst; thewhole tenor of their conversation, was recent, raw, and stinging in mymind; I had felt every word as acutely as I had heard it plainly,and a passion of resentment fomented now within me.

　　Mrs. Reed looked up from her work; her eye settled on mine, herfingers at the same time suspended their nimble movements.

　　'Go out of the room; return to the nursery,' was her mandate. Mylook or something else must have struck her as offensive, for shespoke with extreme though suppressed irritation. I got up, I went tothe door; I came back again; I walked to the window, across theroom, then close up to her.

　　Speak I must: I had been trodden on severely, and must turn: buthow? What strength had I to dart retaliation at my antagonist? Igathered my energies and launched them in this blunt sentence-

　　'I am not deceitful: if I were, I should say I loved you; but Ideclare I do not love you: I dislike you the worst of anybody in theworld except John Reed; and this book about the liar, you may giveto your girl, Georgiana, for it is she who tells lies, and not I.'

　　Mrs. Reed's hands still lay on her work inactive: her eye of icecontinued to dwell freezingly on mine.

　　'What more have you to say?' she asked, rather in the tone in whicha person might address an opponent of adult age than such as isordinarily used to a child.

　　That eye of hers, that voice stirred every antipathy I had. Shakingfrom head to foot, thrilled with ungovernable excitement, I continued-

　　'I am glad you are no relation of mine: I will never call youaunt again so long as I live. I will never come to see you when I amgrown up; and if any one asks me how I liked you, and how youtreated me, I will say the very thought of you makes me sick, and thatyou treated me with miserable cruelty.'

　　'How dare you affirm that, Jane Eyre?'

　　'How dare I, Mrs. Reed? How dare I? Because it is the truth. Youthink I have no feelings, and that I can do without one bit of love orkindness; but I cannot live so: and you have no pity. I shall rememberhow you thrust me back- roughly and violently thrust me back- into thered-room, and locked me up there, to my dying day; though I was inagony; though I cried out, while suffocating with distress, "Havemercy! Have mercy, Aunt Reed!" And that punishment you made mesuffer because your wicked boy struck me- knocked me down for nothing.I will tell anybody who asks me questions, this exact tale. Peoplethink you a good woman, but you are bad, hard-hearted. You aredeceitful!'

　　Ere I had finished this reply, my soul began to expand, to exult,with the strangest sense of freedom, of triumph, I ever felt. Itseemed as if an invisible bond had burst, and that I had struggled outinto unhoped-for liberty. Not without cause was this sentiment: Mrs.Reed looked frightened; her work had slipped from her knee; she waslifting up her hands, rocking herself to and fro, and even twistingher face as if she would cry.

　　'Jane, you are under a mistake: what is the matter with you? Why doyou tremble so violently? Would you like to drink some water?'

　　'No, Mrs. Reed.'

　　'Is there anything else you wish for, Jane? I assure you, Idesire to be your friend.'

　　'Not you. You told Mr. Brocklehurst I had a bad character, adeceitful disposition; and I'll let everybody at Lowood know whatyou are, and what you have done.'

　　'Jane, you don't understand these things: children must becorrected for their faults.'

　　'Deceit is not my fault!' I cried out in a savage, high voice.

　　'But you are passionate, Jane, that you must allow: and nowreturn to the nursery- there's a dear- and lie down a little.'

　　'I am not your dear; I cannot lie down: send me to school soon,Mrs. Reed, for I hate to live here.'

　　'I will indeed send her to school soon,' murmured Mrs. Reed sottovoce; and gathering up her work, she abruptly quitted the apartment.

　　I was left there alone- winner of the field. It was the hardestbattle I had fought, and the first victory I had gained: I stoodawhile on the rug, where Mr. Brocklehurst had stood, and I enjoyedmy conqueror's solitude. First, I smiled to myself and felt elate; butthis fierce pleasure subsided in me as fast as did the acceleratedthrob of my pulses. A child cannot quarrel with its elders, as I haddone; cannot give its furious feelings uncontrolled play, as I hadgiven mine, without experiencing afterwards the pang of remorse andthe chill of reaction. A ridge of lighted heath, alive, glancing,devouring, would have been a meet emblem of my mind when I accused andmenaced Mrs. Reed: the same ridge, black and blasted after theflames are dead, would have represented as meetly my subsequentcondition, when half an hour's silence and reflection had shown me themadness of my conduct, and the dreariness of my hated and hatingposition.

　　Something of vengeance I had tasted for the first time; as aromaticwine it seemed, on swallowing, warm and racy: its after-flavour,metallic and corroding, gave me a sensation as if I had been poisoned.Willingly would I now have gone and asked Mrs. Reed's pardon; but Iknew, partly from experience and partly from instinct, that was theway to make her repulse me with double scorn, thereby re-excitingevery turbulent impulse of my nature.

　　I would fain exercise some better faculty than that of fiercespeaking; fain find nourishment for some less fiendish feeling thanthat of sombre indignation. I took a book- some Arabian tales; I satdown and endeavoured to read. I could make no sense of the subject; myown thoughts swam always between me and the page I had usually foundfascinating. I opened the glass-door in the breakfast-room: theshrubbery was quite still: the black frost reigned, unbroken by sun orbreeze, through the grounds. I covered my head and arms with the skirtof my frock, and went out to walk in a part of the plantation whichwas quite sequestered; but I found no pleasure in the silent trees,the falling fir-cones, the congealed relics of autumn, russetleaves, swept by past winds in heaps, and now stiffened together. Ileaned against a gate, and looked into an empty field where no sheepwere feeding, where the short grass was nipped and blanched. It wasa very grey day; a most opaque sky, 'onding on snaw,' canopied all;thence flakes fell at intervals, which settled on the hard path and onthe hoary lea without melting. I stood, a wretched child enough,whispering to myself over and over again, 'What shall I do?- whatshall I do?'

　　All at once I heard a clear voice call, 'Miss Jane! where areyou? Come to lunch!'

　　It was Bessie, I knew well enough; but I did not stir; her lightstep came tripping down the path.

　　'You naughty little thing!' she said. 'Why don't you come whenyou are called?'

　　Bessie's presence, compared with the thoughts over which I had beenbrooding, seemed cheerful; even though, as usual, she was somewhatcross. The fact is, after my conflict with and victory over Mrs. Reed,I was not disposed to care much for the nursemaid's transitoryanger; and I was disposed to bask in her youthful lightness ofheart. I just put my two arms round her and said, 'Come, Bessie! don'tscold.'

　　The action was more frank and fearless than any I was habituated toindulge in: somehow it pleased her.

　　'You are a strange child, Miss Jane,' she said, as she lookeddown at me; 'a little roving, solitary thing: and you are going toschool, I suppose?'

　　I nodded.

　　'And won't you be sorry to leave poor Bessie?'

　　'What does Bessie care for me? She is always scolding me.'

　　'Because you're such a queer, frightened, shy little thing. Youshould be bolder.'

　　'What! to get more knocks?'

　　'Nonsense! But you are rather put upon, that's certain. My mothersaid, when she came to see me last week, that she would not like alittle one of her own to be in your place.- Now, come in, and I'vesome good news for you.'

　　'I don't think you have, Bessie.'

　　'Child! what do you mean? What sorrowful eyes you fix on me!Well, but Missis and the young ladies and Master John are going out totea this afternoon, and you shall have tea with me. I'll ask cook tobake you a little cake, and then you shall help me to look over yourdrawers; for I am soon to pack your trunk. Missis intends you to leaveGateshead in a day or two, and you shall choose what toys you liketo take with you.'

　　'Bessie, you must promise not to scold me any more till I go.'

　　'Well, I will; but mind you are a very good girl, and don't beafraid of me. Don't start when I chance to speak rather sharply;it's so provoking.'

　　'I don't think I shall ever be afraid of you again, Bessie, becauseI have got used to you, and I shall soon have another set of people todread.'

　　'If you dread them they'll dislike you.'

　　'As you do, Bessie?'

　　'I don't dislike you, Miss: I believe I am fonder of you than ofall the others.'

　　'You don't show it.'

　　'You little sharp thing! you've got quite a new way of talking.What makes you so venturesome and hardy?'

　　'Why, I shall soon be away from you, and besides'- I was going tosay something about what had passed between me and Mrs. Reed, but onsecond thoughts I considered it better to remain silent on that head.

　　'And so you're glad to leave me?'

　　'Not at all, Bessie; indeed, just now I'm rather sorry.'

　　'Just now! and rather! How coolly my little lady says it! I daresaynow if I were to ask you for a kiss you wouldn't give it me: you'd sayyou'd rather not.'

　　'I'll kiss you and welcome: bend your head down.' Bessie stooped;we mutually embraced, and I followed her into the house quitecomforted. That afternoon lapsed in peace and harmony; and in theevening Bessie told me some of her most enchaining stories, and sangme some of her sweetest songs. Even for me life had its gleams ofsunshine.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER V

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　FIVE o'clock had hardly struck on the morning of the 19th ofJanuary, when Bessie brought a candle into my closet and found mealready up and nearly dressed. I had risen half an hour before herentrance, and had washed my face, and put on my clothes by the lightof a half-moon just setting, whose rays streamed through the narrowwindow near my crib. I was to leave Gateshead that day by a coachwhich passed the lodge gates at six A.M. Bessie was the only personyet risen; she had lit a fire in the nursery, where she nowproceeded to make my breakfast. Few children can eat when excited withthe thoughts of a journey; nor could I. Bessie, having pressed me invain to take a few spoonfuls of the boiled milk and bread she hadprepared for me, wrapped up some biscuits in a paper and put them intomy bag; then she helped me on with my pelisse and bonnet, and wrappingherself in a shawl, she and I left the nursery. As we passed Mrs.Reed's bedroom, she said, 'Will you go in and bid Missis good-bye?'

　　'No, Bessie: she came to my crib last night when you were gone downto supper, and said I need not disturb her in the morning, or mycousins either; and she told me to remember that she had always beenmy best friend, and to speak of her and be grateful to heraccordingly.'

　　'What did you say, Miss?'

　　'Nothing: I covered my face with the bedclothes, and turned fromher to the wall.'

　　'That was wrong, Miss Jane.'

　　'It was quite right, Bessie. Your Missis has not been my friend:she has been my foe.'

　　'O Miss Jane! don't say so!'

　　'Good-bye to Gateshead!' cried I, as we passed through the hall andwent out at the front door.

　　The moon was set, and it was very dark; Bessie carried a lantern,whose light glanced on wet steps and gravel road sodden by a recentthaw. Raw and chill was the winter morning: my teeth chattered as Ihastened down the drive. There was a light in the porter's lodge: whenwe reached it, we found the porter's wife just kindling her fire: mytrunk, which had been carried down the evening before, stood corded atthe door. It wanted but a few minutes of six, and shortly after thathour had struck, the distant roll of wheels announced the comingcoach; I went to the door and watched its lamps approach rapidlythrough the gloom.

　　'Is she going by herself?' asked the porter's wife.

　　'Yes.'

　　'And how far is it?'

　　'Fifty miles.'

　　'What a long way! I wonder Mrs. Reed is not afraid to trust herso far alone.'

　　The coach drew up; there it was at the gates with its four horsesand its top laden with passengers: the guard and coachman loudly urgedhaste; my trunk was hoisted up; I was taken from Bessie's neck, towhich I clung with kisses.

　　'Be sure and take good care of her,' cried she to the guard, ashe lifted me into the inside.

　　'Ay, ay!' was the answer: the door was slapped to, a voiceexclaimed 'All right,' and on we drove. Thus was I severed from Bessieand Gateshead; thus whirled away to unknown, and, as I then deemed,remote and mysterious regions.

　　I remember but little of the journey; I only know that the dayseemed to me of a preternatural length, and that we appeared to travelover hundreds of miles of road. We passed through several towns, andin one, a very large one, the coach stopped; the horses were takenout, and the passengers alighted to dine. I was carried into an inn,where the guard wanted me to have some dinner; but, as I had noappetite, he left me in an immense room with a fireplace at eachend, a chandelier pendent from the ceiling, and a little red galleryhigh up against the wall filled with musical instruments. Here Iwalked about for a long time, feeling very strange, and mortallyapprehensive of some one coming in and kidnapping me; for I believedin kidnappers, their exploits having frequently figured in Bessie'sfireside chronicles. At last the guard returned; once more I wasstowed away in the coach, my protector mounted his own seat, sounded

　　The afternoon came on wet and somewhat misty: as it waned intodusk, I began to feel that we were getting very far indeed fromGateshead: we ceased to pass through towns; the country changed; greatgrey hills heaved up round the horizon: as twilight deepened, wedescended a valley, dark with wood, and long after night hadoverclouded the prospect, I heard a wild wind rushing amongst trees.

　　Lulled by the sound, I at last dropped asleep; I had not longslumbered when the sudden cessation of motion awoke me; the coach-doorwas open, and a person like a servant was standing at it: I saw herface and dress by the light of the lamps.

　　'Is there a little girl called Jane Eyre here?' she asked. Ianswered 'Yes', and was then lifted out; my trunk was handed down, andthe coach instantly drove away.

　　I was stiff with long sitting, and bewildered with the noise andmotion of the coach: gathering my faculties, I looked about me.Rain, wind, and darkness filled the air; nevertheless, I dimlydiscerned a wall before me and a door open in it; through this doorI passed with my new guide: she shut and locked it behind her. Therewas now visible a house or houses- for the building spread far- withmany windows, and lights burning in some; we went up a broad pebblypath, splashing wet, and were admitted at a door; then the servant ledme through a passage into a room with a fire, where she left me alone.

　　I stood and warmed my numbed fingers over the blaze, then Ilooked round; there was no candle, but the uncertain light from thehearth showed, by intervals, papered walls, carpet, curtains,shining mahogany furniture: it was a parlour, not so spacious orsplendid as the drawing-room at Gateshead, but comfortable enough. Iwas puzzling to make out the subject of a picture on the wall, whenthe door opened, and an individual carrying a light entered; anotherfollowed close behind.

　　The first was a tall lady with dark hair, dark eyes, and a pale andlarge forehead; her figure was partly enveloped in a shawl, hercountenance was grave, her bearing erect.

　　'The child is very young to be sent alone,' said she, putting hercandle down on the table. She considered me attentively for a minuteor two, then further added-

　　'She had better be put to bed soon; she looks tired: are youtired?' she asked, placing her hand on my shoulder.

　　'A little, ma'am.'

　　'And hungry too, no doubt: let her have some supper before she goesto bed, Miss Miller. Is this the first time you have left your parentsto come to school, my little girl?'

　　I explained to her that I had no parents. She inquired how longthey had been dead: then how old I was, what was my name, whether Icould read, write, and sew a little: then she touched my cheekgently with her forefinger, and saying, 'She hoped I should be agood child,' dismissed me along with Miss Miller.

　　The lady I had left might be about twenty-nine; the one who wentwith me appeared some years younger: the first impressed me by hervoice, look, and air. Miss Miller was more ordinary; ruddy incomplexion, though of a careworn countenance; hurried in gait andaction, like one who had always a multiplicity of tasks on hand: shelooked, indeed, what I afterwards found she really was, anunder-teacher. Led by her, I passed from compartment to compartment,from passage to passage, of a large and irregular building; till,emerging from the total and somewhat dreary silence pervading thatportion of the house we had traversed, we came upon the hum of manyvoices, and presently entered a wide, long room, with great dealtables, two at each end, on each of which burnt a pair of candles, andseated all round on benches, a congregation of girls of every age,from nine or ten to twenty. Seen by the dim light of the dips, theirnumber to me appeared countless, though not in reality exceedingeighty; they were uniformly dressed in brown stuff frocks of quaintfashion, and long holland pinafores. It was the hour of study; theywere engaged in conning over their to-morrow's task, and the hum I hadheard was the combined result of their whispered repetitions.

　　Miss Miller signed to me to sit on a bench near the door, thenwalking up to the top of the long room she cried out-

　　'Monitors, collect the lesson-books and put them away!'

　　Four tall girls arose from different tables, and going round,gathered the books and removed them. Miss Miller again gave the wordof command-

　　'Monitors, fetch the supper-trays!'

　　The tall girls went out and returned presently, each bearing atray, with portions of something, I knew not what, arranged thereon,and a pitcher of water and mug in the middle of each tray. Theportions were handed round; those who liked took a draught of thewater, the mug being common to all. When it came to my turn, Idrank, for I was thirsty, but did not touch the food, excitement andfatigue rendering me incapable of eating; I now saw, however, thatit was a thin oaten cake shared into fragments.

　　The meal over, prayers were read by Miss Miller, and the classesfiled off, two and two, upstairs. Overpowered by this time withweariness, I scarcely noticed what sort of a place the bedroom was,except that, like the schoolroom, I saw it was very long. To-night Iwas to be Miss Miller's bed-fellow; she helped me to undress: whenlaid down I glanced at the long rows of beds, each of which wasquickly filled with two occupants; in ten minutes the single light wasextinguished, and amidst silence and complete darkness I fell asleep.

　　The night passed rapidly: I was too tired even to dream; I onlyonce awoke to hear the wind rave in furious gusts, and the rain fallin torrents, and to be sensible that Miss Miller had taken her placeby my side. When I again unclosed my eyes, a loud bell was ringing;the girls were up and dressing; day had not yet begun to dawn, and arushlight or two burned in the room. I too rose reluctantly; it wasbitter cold, and I dressed as well as I could for shivering, andwashed when there was a basin at liberty, which did not occur soon, asthere was but one basin to six girls, on the stands down the middle ofthe room. Again the bell rang; all formed in file, two and two, and inthat order descended the stairs and entered the cold and dimly litschoolroom: here prayers were read by Miss Miller; afterwards shecalled out-

　　'Form classes!'

　　A great tumult succeeded for some minutes, during which Miss Millerrepeatedly exclaimed, 'Silence!' and 'Order!' When it subsided, Isaw them all drawn up in four semicircles, before four chairs,placed at the four tables; all held books in their hands, and agreat book, like a Bible, lay on each table, before the vacant seat. Apause of some seconds succeeded, filled up by the low, vague hum ofnumbers; Miss Miller walked from class to class, hushing thisindefinite sound.

　　A distant bell tinkled: immediately three ladies entered theroom, each walked to a table and took her seat; Miss Miller assumedthe fourth vacant chair, which was that nearest the door, and aroundwhich the smallest of the children were assembled: to this inferiorclass I was called, and placed at the bottom of it.

　　Business now began: the day's Collect was repeated, then certaintexts of Scripture were said, and to these succeeded a protractedreading of chapters in the Bible, which lasted an hour. By the timethat exercise was terminated, day had fully dawned. Theindefatigable bell now sounded for the fourth time: the classes weremarshalled and marched into another room to breakfast: how glad Iwas to behold a prospect of getting something to eat! I was now nearlysick from inanition, having taken so little the day before.

　　The refectory was a great, low-ceiled, gloomy room; on two longtables smoked basins of something hot, which, however, to my dismay,sent forth an odour far from inviting. I saw a universal manifestationof discontent when the fumes of the repast met the nostrils of thosedestined to swallow it; from the van of the procession, the tall girlsof the first class, rose the whispered words-

　　'Disgusting! The porridge is burnt again!'

　　'Silence!' ejaculated a voice; not that of Miss Miller, but oneof the upper teachers, a little and dark personage, smartly dressed,but of somewhat morose aspect, who installed herself at the top of onetable, while a more buxom lady presided at the other. I looked in vainfor her I had first seen the night before; she was not visible: MissMiller occupied the foot of the table where I sat, and a strange,foreign-looking, elderly lady, the French teacher, as I afterwardsfound, took the corresponding seat at the other board. A long gracewas said and a hymn sung; then a servant brought in some tea for theteachers, and the meal began.

　　Ravenous, and now very faint, I devoured a spoonful or two of myportion without thinking of its taste; but the first edge of hungerblunted, I perceived I had got in hand a nauseous mess; burnt porridgeis almost as bad as rotten potatoes; famine itself soon sickens overit. The spoons were moved slowly: I saw each girl taste her food andtry to swallow it; but in most cases the effort was soon relinquished.Breakfast was over, and none had breakfasted. Thanks being returnedfor what we had not got, and a second hymn chanted, the refectorywas evacuated for the schoolroom. I was one of the last to go out, andin passing the tables, I saw one teacher take a basin of theporridge and taste it; she looked at the others; all theircountenances expressed displeasure, and one of them, the stout one,whispered-

　　'Abominable stuff! How shameful!'

　　A quarter of an hour passed before lessons again began, duringwhich the schoolroom was in a glorious tumult; for that space oftime it seemed to be permitted to talk loud and more freely, andthey used their privilege. The whole conversation ran on thebreakfast, which one and all abused roundly. Poor things! it was thesole consolation they had. Miss Miller was now the only teacher in theroom: a group of great girls standing about her spoke with serious andsullen gestures. I heard the name of Mr. Brocklehurst pronounced bysome lips; at which Miss Miller shook her head disapprovingly; but shemade no great effort to check the general wrath; doubtless sheshared in it.

　　A clock in the schoolroom struck nine; Miss Miller left her circle,and standing in the middle of the room, cried-

　　'Silence! To your seats!'

　　Discipline prevailed: in five minutes the confused throng wasresolved into order, and comparative silence quelled the Babel clamourof tongues. The upper teachers now punctually resumed their posts: butstill, all seemed to wait. Ranged on benches down the sides of theroom, the eighty girls sat motionless and erect; a quaint assemblagethey appeared, all with plain locks combed from their faces, not acurl visible; in brown dresses, made high and surrounded by a narrowtucker about the throat, with little pockets of holland (shapedsomething like a Highlander's purse) tied in front of their frocks,and destined to serve the purpose of a work-bag: all, too, wearingwoollen stockings and country-made shoes, fastened with brass buckles.Above twenty of those clad in this costume were full-grown girls, orrather young women; it suited them ill, and gave an air of oddity evento the prettiest.

　　I was still looking at them, and also at intervals examining theteachers- none of whom precisely pleased me; for the stout one was alittle coarse, the dark one not a little fierce, the foreigner harshand grotesque, and Miss Miller, poor thing! looked purple,weather-beaten, and over-worked- when, as my eye wandered from face toface, the whole school rose simultaneously, as if moved by a commonspring.

　　What was the matter? I had heard no order given: I was puzzled. EreI had gathered my wits, the classes were again seated: but as all eyeswere now turned to one point, mine followed the general direction, andencountered the personage who had received me last night. She stood atthe bottom of the long room, on the hearth; for there was a fire ateach end; she surveyed the two rows of girls silently and gravely.Miss Miller, approaching, seemed to ask her a question, and havingreceived her answer, went back to her place, and said aloud-

　　'Monitor of the first class, fetch the globes!'

　　While the direction was being executed, the lady consulted movedslowly up the room. I suppose I have a considerable organ ofveneration, for I retain yet the sense of admiring awe with which myeyes traced her steps. Seen now, in broad day-light, she lookedtall, fair, and shapely; brown eyes with a benignant light in theiririds, and a fine pencilling of long lashes round, relieved thewhiteness of her large front; on each of her temples her hair, of avery dark brown, was clustered in round curls, according to thefashion of those times, when neither smooth bands nor long ringletswere in vogue; her dress, also in the mode of the day, was of purplecloth, relieved by a sort of Spanish trimming of black velvet; agold watch (watches were not so common then as now) shone at hergirdle. Let the reader add, to complete the picture, refined features;a complexion, if pale, clear; and a stately air and carriage, and hewill have, at least, as clearly as words can give it, a correct ideaof the exterior of Miss Temple- Maria Temple, as I afterwards sawthe name written in a prayer-book intrusted to me to carry to church.

　　The superintendent of Lowood (for such was this lady) havingtaken her seat before a pair of globes placed on one of the tables,summoned the first class round her, and commenced giving a lesson ongeography; the lower classes were called by the teachers:repetitions in history, grammar, etc., went on for an hour; writingand arithmetic succeeded, and music lessons were given by MissTemple to some of the elder girls. The duration of each lesson wasmeasured by the clock, which at last struck twelve. The superintendentrose-

　　'I have a word to address to the pupils,' said she.

　　The tumult of cessation from lessons was already breaking forth,but it sank at her voice. She went on-

　　'You had this morning a breakfast which you could not eat; you mustbe hungry:- I have ordered that a lunch of bread and cheese shall beserved to all.'

　　The teachers looked at her with a sort of surprise.

　　'It is to be done on my responsibility,' she added, in anexplanatory tone to them, and immediately afterwards left the room.

　　The bread and cheese was presently brought in and distributed, tothe high delight and refreshment of the whole school. The order wasnow given 'To the garden!' Each put on a coarse straw bonnet, withstrings of coloured calico, and a cloak of grey frieze, I wassimilarly equipped, and, following the stream, I made my way intothe open air.

　　The garden was a wide enclosure, surrounded with walls so high asto exclude every glimpse of prospect; a covered verandah ran downone side, and broad walks bordered a middle space divided intoscores of little beds: these beds were assigned as gardens for thepupils to cultivate, and each bed had an owner. When full of flowersthey would doubtless look pretty; but now, at the latter end ofJanuary, all was wintry blight and brown decay. I shuddered as I stoodand looked round me: it was an inclement day for outdoor exercise; notpositively rainy, but darkened by a drizzling yellow fog; all underfoot was still soaking wet with the floods of yesterday. Thestronger among the girls ran about and engaged in active games, butsundry pale and thin ones herded together for shelter and warmth inthe verandah; and amongst these, as the dense mist penetrated to theirshivering frames, I heard frequently the sound of a hollow cough.

　　As yet I had spoken to no one, nor did anybody seem to takenotice of me; I stood lonely enough: but to that feeling ofisolation I was accustomed; it did not oppress me much. I leantagainst a pillar of the verandah, drew my grey mantle close aboutme, and, trying to forget the cold which nipped me without, and theunsatisfied hunger which gnawed me within, delivered myself up tothe employment of watching and thinking. My reflections were tooundefined and fragmentary to merit record: I hardly yet knew where Iwas; Gateshead and my past life seemed floated away to an immeasurabledistance; the present was vague and strange, and of the future I couldform no conjecture. I looked round the convent-like garden, and thenup at the house- a large building, half of which seemed grey andold, the other half quite new. The new part, containing the schoolroomand dormitory, was lit by mullioned and latticed windows, which gaveit a church-like aspect; a stone tablet over the door bore thisinscription-Brocklehurst, of Brocklehurst Hall, in this county.' 'Let your lightso shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorifyyour Father which is in heaven.'- St. Matt. v. 16.

　　I read these words over and over again: I felt that anexplanation belonged to them, and was unable fully to penetratetheir import. I was still pondering the signification of'Institution', and endeavouring to make out a connection between thefirst words and the verse of Scripture, when the sound of a coughclose behind me made me turn my head. I saw a girl sitting on astone bench near; she was bent over a book, on the perusal of whichshe seemed intent: from where I stood I could see the title- it wasRasselas; a name that struck me as strange, and consequentlyattractive. In turning a leaf she happened to look up, and I said toher directly-

　　'Is your book interesting?' I had already formed the intention ofasking her to lend it to me some day.

　　'I like it,' she answered, after a pause of a second or two, duringwhich she examined me.

　　'What is it about?' I continued. I hardly know where I found thehardihood thus to open a conversation with a stranger; the step wascontrary to my nature and habits: but I think her occupation touched achord of sympathy somewhere; for I too liked reading, though of afrivolous and childish kind; I could not digest or comprehend theserious or substantial.

　　'You may look at it,' replied the girl, offering me the book.
