　　'I don't dislike you, Miss: I believe I am fonder of you than ofall the others.'

　　'You don't show it.'

　　'You little sharp thing! you've got quite a new way of talking.What makes you so venturesome and hardy?'

　　'Why, I shall soon be away from you, and besides'- I was going tosay something about what had passed between me and Mrs. Reed, but onsecond thoughts I considered it better to remain silent on that head.

　　'And so you're glad to leave me?'

　　'Not at all, Bessie; indeed, just now I'm rather sorry.'

　　'Just now! and rather! How coolly my little lady says it! I daresaynow if I were to ask you for a kiss you wouldn't give it me: you'd sayyou'd rather not.'

　　'I'll kiss you and welcome: bend your head down.' Bessie stooped;we mutually embraced, and I followed her into the house quitecomforted. That afternoon lapsed in peace and harmony; and in theevening Bessie told me some of her most enchaining stories, and sangme some of her sweetest songs. Even for me life had its gleams ofsunshine.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER V

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　FIVE o'clock had hardly struck on the morning of the 19th ofJanuary, when Bessie brought a candle into my closet and found mealready up and nearly dressed. I had risen half an hour before herentrance, and had washed my face, and put on my clothes by the lightof a half-moon just setting, whose rays streamed through the narrowwindow near my crib. I was to leave Gateshead that day by a coachwhich passed the lodge gates at six A.M. Bessie was the only personyet risen; she had lit a fire in the nursery, where she nowproceeded to make my breakfast. Few children can eat when excited withthe thoughts of a journey; nor could I. Bessie, having pressed me invain to take a few spoonfuls of the boiled milk and bread she hadprepared for me, wrapped up some biscuits in a paper and put them intomy bag; then she helped me on with my pelisse and bonnet, and wrappingherself in a shawl, she and I left the nursery. As we passed Mrs.Reed's bedroom, she said, 'Will you go in and bid Missis good-bye?'

　　'No, Bessie: she came to my crib last night when you were gone downto supper, and said I need not disturb her in the morning, or mycousins either; and she told me to remember that she had always beenmy best friend, and to speak of her and be grateful to heraccordingly.'

　　'What did you say, Miss?'

　　'Nothing: I covered my face with the bedclothes, and turned fromher to the wall.'

　　'That was wrong, Miss Jane.'

　　'It was quite right, Bessie. Your Missis has not been my friend:she has been my foe.'

　　'O Miss Jane! don't say so!'

　　'Good-bye to Gateshead!' cried I, as we passed through the hall andwent out at the front door.

　　The moon was set, and it was very dark; Bessie carried a lantern,whose light glanced on wet steps and gravel road sodden by a recentthaw. Raw and chill was the winter morning: my teeth chattered as Ihastened down the drive. There was a light in the porter's lodge: whenwe reached it, we found the porter's wife just kindling her fire: mytrunk, which had been carried down the evening before, stood corded atthe door. It wanted but a few minutes of six, and shortly after thathour had struck, the distant roll of wheels announced the comingcoach; I went to the door and watched its lamps approach rapidlythrough the gloom.

　　'Is she going by herself?' asked the porter's wife.

　　'Yes.'

　　'And how far is it?'

　　'Fifty miles.'

　　'What a long way! I wonder Mrs. Reed is not afraid to trust herso far alone.'

　　The coach drew up; there it was at the gates with its four horsesand its top laden with passengers: the guard and coachman loudly urgedhaste; my trunk was hoisted up; I was taken from Bessie's neck, towhich I clung with kisses.

　　'Be sure and take good care of her,' cried she to the guard, ashe lifted me into the inside.

　　'Ay, ay!' was the answer: the door was slapped to, a voiceexclaimed 'All right,' and on we drove. Thus was I severed from Bessieand Gateshead; thus whirled away to unknown, and, as I then deemed,remote and mysterious regions.

　　I remember but little of the journey; I only know that the dayseemed to me of a preternatural length, and that we appeared to travelover hundreds of miles of road. We passed through several towns, andin one, a very large one, the coach stopped; the horses were takenout, and the passengers alighted to dine. I was carried into an inn,where the guard wanted me to have some dinner; but, as I had noappetite, he left me in an immense room with a fireplace at eachend, a chandelier pendent from the ceiling, and a little red galleryhigh up against the wall filled with musical instruments. Here Iwalked about for a long time, feeling very strange, and mortallyapprehensive of some one coming in and kidnapping me; for I believedin kidnappers, their exploits having frequently figured in Bessie'sfireside chronicles. At last the guard returned; once more I wasstowed away in the coach, my protector mounted his own seat, sounded

　　The afternoon came on wet and somewhat misty: as it waned intodusk, I began to feel that we were getting very far indeed fromGateshead: we ceased to pass through towns; the country changed; greatgrey hills heaved up round the horizon: as twilight deepened, wedescended a valley, dark with wood, and long after night hadoverclouded the prospect, I heard a wild wind rushing amongst trees.

　　Lulled by the sound, I at last dropped asleep; I had not longslumbered when the sudden cessation of motion awoke me; the coach-doorwas open, and a person like a servant was standing at it: I saw herface and dress by the light of the lamps.

　　'Is there a little girl called Jane Eyre here?' she asked. Ianswered 'Yes', and was then lifted out; my trunk was handed down, andthe coach instantly drove away.

　　I was stiff with long sitting, and bewildered with the noise andmotion of the coach: gathering my faculties, I looked about me.Rain, wind, and darkness filled the air; nevertheless, I dimlydiscerned a wall before me and a door open in it; through this doorI passed with my new guide: she shut and locked it behind her. Therewas now visible a house or houses- for the building spread far- withmany windows, and lights burning in some; we went up a broad pebblypath, splashing wet, and were admitted at a door; then the servant ledme through a passage into a room with a fire, where she left me alone.

　　I stood and warmed my numbed fingers over the blaze, then Ilooked round; there was no candle, but the uncertain light from thehearth showed, by intervals, papered walls, carpet, curtains,shining mahogany furniture: it was a parlour, not so spacious orsplendid as the drawing-room at Gateshead, but comfortable enough. Iwas puzzling to make out the subject of a picture on the wall, whenthe door opened, and an individual carrying a light entered; anotherfollowed close behind.

　　The first was a tall lady with dark hair, dark eyes, and a pale andlarge forehead; her figure was partly enveloped in a shawl, hercountenance was grave, her bearing erect.

　　'The child is very young to be sent alone,' said she, putting hercandle down on the table. She considered me attentively for a minuteor two, then further added-

　　'She had better be put to bed soon; she looks tired: are youtired?' she asked, placing her hand on my shoulder.

　　'A little, ma'am.'

　　'And hungry too, no doubt: let her have some supper before she goesto bed, Miss Miller. Is this the first time you have left your parentsto come to school, my little girl?'

　　I explained to her that I had no parents. She inquired how longthey had been dead: then how old I was, what was my name, whether Icould read, write, and sew a little: then she touched my cheekgently with her forefinger, and saying, 'She hoped I should be agood child,' dismissed me along with Miss Miller.

　　The lady I had left might be about twenty-nine; the one who wentwith me appeared some years younger: the first impressed me by hervoice, look, and air. Miss Miller was more ordinary; ruddy incomplexion, though of a careworn countenance; hurried in gait andaction, like one who had always a multiplicity of tasks on hand: shelooked, indeed, what I afterwards found she really was, anunder-teacher. Led by her, I passed from compartment to compartment,from passage to passage, of a large and irregular building; till,emerging from the total and somewhat dreary silence pervading thatportion of the house we had traversed, we came upon the hum of manyvoices, and presently entered a wide, long room, with great dealtables, two at each end, on each of which burnt a pair of candles, andseated all round on benches, a congregation of girls of every age,from nine or ten to twenty. Seen by the dim light of the dips, theirnumber to me appeared countless, though not in reality exceedingeighty; they were uniformly dressed in brown stuff frocks of quaintfashion, and long holland pinafores. It was the hour of study; theywere engaged in conning over their to-morrow's task, and the hum I hadheard was the combined result of their whispered repetitions.

　　Miss Miller signed to me to sit on a bench near the door, thenwalking up to the top of the long room she cried out-

　　'Monitors, collect the lesson-books and put them away!'

　　Four tall girls arose from different tables, and going round,gathered the books and removed them. Miss Miller again gave the wordof command-

　　'Monitors, fetch the supper-trays!'

　　The tall girls went out and returned presently, each bearing atray, with portions of something, I knew not what, arranged thereon,and a pitcher of water and mug in the middle of each tray. Theportions were handed round; those who liked took a draught of thewater, the mug being common to all. When it came to my turn, Idrank, for I was thirsty, but did not touch the food, excitement andfatigue rendering me incapable of eating; I now saw, however, thatit was a thin oaten cake shared into fragments.

　　The meal over, prayers were read by Miss Miller, and the classesfiled off, two and two, upstairs. Overpowered by this time withweariness, I scarcely noticed what sort of a place the bedroom was,except that, like the schoolroom, I saw it was very long. To-night Iwas to be Miss Miller's bed-fellow; she helped me to undress: whenlaid down I glanced at the long rows of beds, each of which wasquickly filled with two occupants; in ten minutes the single light wasextinguished, and amidst silence and complete darkness I fell asleep.

　　The night passed rapidly: I was too tired even to dream; I onlyonce awoke to hear the wind rave in furious gusts, and the rain fallin torrents, and to be sensible that Miss Miller had taken her placeby my side. When I again unclosed my eyes, a loud bell was ringing;the girls were up and dressing; day had not yet begun to dawn, and arushlight or two burned in the room. I too rose reluctantly; it wasbitter cold, and I dressed as well as I could for shivering, andwashed when there was a basin at liberty, which did not occur soon, asthere was but one basin to six girls, on the stands down the middle ofthe room. Again the bell rang; all formed in file, two and two, and inthat order descended the stairs and entered the cold and dimly litschoolroom: here prayers were read by Miss Miller; afterwards shecalled out-

　　'Form classes!'

　　A great tumult succeeded for some minutes, during which Miss Millerrepeatedly exclaimed, 'Silence!' and 'Order!' When it subsided, Isaw them all drawn up in four semicircles, before four chairs,placed at the four tables; all held books in their hands, and agreat book, like a Bible, lay on each table, before the vacant seat. Apause of some seconds succeeded, filled up by the low, vague hum ofnumbers; Miss Miller walked from class to class, hushing thisindefinite sound.

　　A distant bell tinkled: immediately three ladies entered theroom, each walked to a table and took her seat; Miss Miller assumedthe fourth vacant chair, which was that nearest the door, and aroundwhich the smallest of the children were assembled: to this inferiorclass I was called, and placed at the bottom of it.

　　Business now began: the day's Collect was repeated, then certaintexts of Scripture were said, and to these succeeded a protractedreading of chapters in the Bible, which lasted an hour. By the timethat exercise was terminated, day had fully dawned. Theindefatigable bell now sounded for the fourth time: the classes weremarshalled and marched into another room to breakfast: how glad Iwas to behold a prospect of getting something to eat! I was now nearlysick from inanition, having taken so little the day before.

　　The refectory was a great, low-ceiled, gloomy room; on two longtables smoked basins of something hot, which, however, to my dismay,sent forth an odour far from inviting. I saw a universal manifestationof discontent when the fumes of the repast met the nostrils of thosedestined to swallow it; from the van of the procession, the tall girlsof the first class, rose the whispered words-

　　'Disgusting! The porridge is burnt again!'

　　'Silence!' ejaculated a voice; not that of Miss Miller, but oneof the upper teachers, a little and dark personage, smartly dressed,but of somewhat morose aspect, who installed herself at the top of onetable, while a more buxom lady presided at the other. I looked in vainfor her I had first seen the night before; she was not visible: MissMiller occupied the foot of the table where I sat, and a strange,foreign-looking, elderly lady, the French teacher, as I afterwardsfound, took the corresponding seat at the other board. A long gracewas said and a hymn sung; then a servant brought in some tea for theteachers, and the meal began.

　　Ravenous, and now very faint, I devoured a spoonful or two of myportion without thinking of its taste; but the first edge of hungerblunted, I perceived I had got in hand a nauseous mess; burnt porridgeis almost as bad as rotten potatoes; famine itself soon sickens overit. The spoons were moved slowly: I saw each girl taste her food andtry to swallow it; but in most cases the effort was soon relinquished.Breakfast was over, and none had breakfasted. Thanks being returnedfor what we had not got, and a second hymn chanted, the refectorywas evacuated for the schoolroom. I was one of the last to go out, andin passing the tables, I saw one teacher take a basin of theporridge and taste it; she looked at the others; all theircountenances expressed displeasure, and one of them, the stout one,whispered-

　　'Abominable stuff! How shameful!'

　　A quarter of an hour passed before lessons again began, duringwhich the schoolroom was in a glorious tumult; for that space oftime it seemed to be permitted to talk loud and more freely, andthey used their privilege. The whole conversation ran on thebreakfast, which one and all abused roundly. Poor things! it was thesole consolation they had. Miss Miller was now the only teacher in theroom: a group of great girls standing about her spoke with serious andsullen gestures. I heard the name of Mr. Brocklehurst pronounced bysome lips; at which Miss Miller shook her head disapprovingly; but shemade no great effort to check the general wrath; doubtless sheshared in it.

　　A clock in the schoolroom struck nine; Miss Miller left her circle,and standing in the middle of the room, cried-

　　'Silence! To your seats!'

　　Discipline prevailed: in five minutes the confused throng wasresolved into order, and comparative silence quelled the Babel clamourof tongues. The upper teachers now punctually resumed their posts: butstill, all seemed to wait. Ranged on benches down the sides of theroom, the eighty girls sat motionless and erect; a quaint assemblagethey appeared, all with plain locks combed from their faces, not acurl visible; in brown dresses, made high and surrounded by a narrowtucker about the throat, with little pockets of holland (shapedsomething like a Highlander's purse) tied in front of their frocks,and destined to serve the purpose of a work-bag: all, too, wearingwoollen stockings and country-made shoes, fastened with brass buckles.Above twenty of those clad in this costume were full-grown girls, orrather young women; it suited them ill, and gave an air of oddity evento the prettiest.

　　I was still looking at them, and also at intervals examining theteachers- none of whom precisely pleased me; for the stout one was alittle coarse, the dark one not a little fierce, the foreigner harshand grotesque, and Miss Miller, poor thing! looked purple,weather-beaten, and over-worked- when, as my eye wandered from face toface, the whole school rose simultaneously, as if moved by a commonspring.

　　What was the matter? I had heard no order given: I was puzzled. EreI had gathered my wits, the classes were again seated: but as all eyeswere now turned to one point, mine followed the general direction, andencountered the personage who had received me last night. She stood atthe bottom of the long room, on the hearth; for there was a fire ateach end; she surveyed the two rows of girls silently and gravely.Miss Miller, approaching, seemed to ask her a question, and havingreceived her answer, went back to her place, and said aloud-

　　'Monitor of the first class, fetch the globes!'

　　While the direction was being executed, the lady consulted movedslowly up the room. I suppose I have a considerable organ ofveneration, for I retain yet the sense of admiring awe with which myeyes traced her steps. Seen now, in broad day-light, she lookedtall, fair, and shapely; brown eyes with a benignant light in theiririds, and a fine pencilling of long lashes round, relieved thewhiteness of her large front; on each of her temples her hair, of avery dark brown, was clustered in round curls, according to thefashion of those times, when neither smooth bands nor long ringletswere in vogue; her dress, also in the mode of the day, was of purplecloth, relieved by a sort of Spanish trimming of black velvet; agold watch (watches were not so common then as now) shone at hergirdle. Let the reader add, to complete the picture, refined features;a complexion, if pale, clear; and a stately air and carriage, and hewill have, at least, as clearly as words can give it, a correct ideaof the exterior of Miss Temple- Maria Temple, as I afterwards sawthe name written in a prayer-book intrusted to me to carry to church.

　　The superintendent of Lowood (for such was this lady) havingtaken her seat before a pair of globes placed on one of the tables,summoned the first class round her, and commenced giving a lesson ongeography; the lower classes were called by the teachers:repetitions in history, grammar, etc., went on for an hour; writingand arithmetic succeeded, and music lessons were given by MissTemple to some of the elder girls. The duration of each lesson wasmeasured by the clock, which at last struck twelve. The superintendentrose-

　　'I have a word to address to the pupils,' said she.

　　The tumult of cessation from lessons was already breaking forth,but it sank at her voice. She went on-

　　'You had this morning a breakfast which you could not eat; you mustbe hungry:- I have ordered that a lunch of bread and cheese shall beserved to all.'

　　The teachers looked at her with a sort of surprise.

　　'It is to be done on my responsibility,' she added, in anexplanatory tone to them, and immediately afterwards left the room.

　　The bread and cheese was presently brought in and distributed, tothe high delight and refreshment of the whole school. The order wasnow given 'To the garden!' Each put on a coarse straw bonnet, withstrings of coloured calico, and a cloak of grey frieze, I wassimilarly equipped, and, following the stream, I made my way intothe open air.

　　The garden was a wide enclosure, surrounded with walls so high asto exclude every glimpse of prospect; a covered verandah ran downone side, and broad walks bordered a middle space divided intoscores of little beds: these beds were assigned as gardens for thepupils to cultivate, and each bed had an owner. When full of flowersthey would doubtless look pretty; but now, at the latter end ofJanuary, all was wintry blight and brown decay. I shuddered as I stoodand looked round me: it was an inclement day for outdoor exercise; notpositively rainy, but darkened by a drizzling yellow fog; all underfoot was still soaking wet with the floods of yesterday. Thestronger among the girls ran about and engaged in active games, butsundry pale and thin ones herded together for shelter and warmth inthe verandah; and amongst these, as the dense mist penetrated to theirshivering frames, I heard frequently the sound of a hollow cough.

　　As yet I had spoken to no one, nor did anybody seem to takenotice of me; I stood lonely enough: but to that feeling ofisolation I was accustomed; it did not oppress me much. I leantagainst a pillar of the verandah, drew my grey mantle close aboutme, and, trying to forget the cold which nipped me without, and theunsatisfied hunger which gnawed me within, delivered myself up tothe employment of watching and thinking. My reflections were tooundefined and fragmentary to merit record: I hardly yet knew where Iwas; Gateshead and my past life seemed floated away to an immeasurabledistance; the present was vague and strange, and of the future I couldform no conjecture. I looked round the convent-like garden, and thenup at the house- a large building, half of which seemed grey andold, the other half quite new. The new part, containing the schoolroomand dormitory, was lit by mullioned and latticed windows, which gaveit a church-like aspect; a stone tablet over the door bore thisinscription-Brocklehurst, of Brocklehurst Hall, in this county.' 'Let your lightso shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorifyyour Father which is in heaven.'- St. Matt. v. 16.

　　I read these words over and over again: I felt that anexplanation belonged to them, and was unable fully to penetratetheir import. I was still pondering the signification of'Institution', and endeavouring to make out a connection between thefirst words and the verse of Scripture, when the sound of a coughclose behind me made me turn my head. I saw a girl sitting on astone bench near; she was bent over a book, on the perusal of whichshe seemed intent: from where I stood I could see the title- it wasRasselas; a name that struck me as strange, and consequentlyattractive. In turning a leaf she happened to look up, and I said toher directly-

　　'Is your book interesting?' I had already formed the intention ofasking her to lend it to me some day.

　　'I like it,' she answered, after a pause of a second or two, duringwhich she examined me.

　　'What is it about?' I continued. I hardly know where I found thehardihood thus to open a conversation with a stranger; the step wascontrary to my nature and habits: but I think her occupation touched achord of sympathy somewhere; for I too liked reading, though of afrivolous and childish kind; I could not digest or comprehend theserious or substantial.

　　'You may look at it,' replied the girl, offering me the book.

　　I did so; a brief examination convinced me that the contents wereless taking than the title: Rasselas looked dull to my trifling taste;I saw nothing about fairies, nothing about genii; no bright varietyseemed spread over the closely-printed pages. I returned it to her;she received it quietly, and without saying anything she was aboutto relapse into her former studious mood: again I ventured todisturb her-

　　'Can you tell me what the writing on that stone over the doormeans? What is Lowood Institution?'

　　'This house where you are come to live.'

　　'And why do they call it Institution? Is it in any way differentfrom other schools?'

　　'It is partly a charity-school: you and I, and all the rest ofus, are charity-children. I suppose you are an orphan: are noteither your father or your mother dead?'

　　'Both died before I can remember.'

　　'Well, all the girls here have lost either one or both parents, andthis is called an institution for educating orphans.'

　　'Do we pay no money? Do they keep us for nothing?'

　　'We pay, or our friends pay, fifteen pounds a year for each.'

　　'Then why do they call us charity-children?'

　　'Because fifteen pounds is not enough for board and teaching, andthe deficiency is supplied by subscription.'

　　'Who subscribes?'

　　'Different benevolent-minded ladies and gentlemen in thisneighbourhood and in London.'

　　'Who was Naomi Brocklehurst?'

　　'The lady who built the new part of this house as that tabletrecords, and whose son overlooks and directs everything here.'

　　'Why?'

　　'Because he is treasurer and manager of the establishment.'

　　'Then this house does not belong to that tall lady who wears awatch, and who said we were to have some bread and cheese?'

　　'To Miss Temple? Oh, no! I wish it did: she has to answer to Mr.Brocklehurst for all she does. Mr. Brocklehurst buys all our foodand all our clothes.'

　　'Does he live here?'

　　'No- two miles off, at a large hall.'

　　'Is he a good man?'

　　'He is a clergyman, and is said to do a great deal of good.'

　　'Did you say that tall lady was called Miss Temple?'

　　'Yes.'

　　'And what are the other teachers called?'

　　'The one with red cheeks is called Miss Smith; she attends to thework, and cuts out- for we make our own clothes, our frocks, andpelisses, and everything; the little one with black hair is MissScatcherd; she teaches history and grammar, and hears the second classrepetitions; and the one who wears a shawl, and has apocket-handkerchief tied to her side with a yellow ribband, isMadame Pierrot: she comes from Lisle, in France, and teaches French.'

　　'Do you like the teachers?'

　　'Well enough.'

　　'Do you like the little black one, and the Madame-? -I cannotpronounce her name as you do.'

　　'Miss Scatcherd is hasty- you must take care not to offend her;Madame Pierrot is not a bad sort of person.'

　　'But Miss Temple is the best- isn't she?'

　　'Miss Temple is very good and very clever; she is above the rest,because she knows far more than they do.'

　　'Have you been long here?'

　　'Two years.'

　　'Are you an orphan?'

　　'My mother is dead.'

　　'Are you happy here?'

　　'You ask rather too many questions. I have given you answers enoughfor the present: now I want to read.'

　　But at that moment the summons sounded for dinner; all re-enteredthe house. The odour which now filled the refectory was scarcelymore appetising than that which had regaled our nostrils at breakfast:the dinner was served in two huge tin-plated vessels, whence rose astrong steam redolent of rancid fat. I found the mess to consist ofindifferent potatoes and strange shreds of rusty meat, mixed andcooked together. Of this preparation a tolerably abundant plateful wasapportioned to each pupil. I ate what I could, and wondered withinmyself whether every day's fare would be like this.

　　After dinner, we immediately adjourned to the schoolroom: lessonsrecommenced, and were continued till five o'clock.

　　The only marked event of the afternoon was, that I saw the girlwith whom I had conversed in the verandah dismissed in disgrace byMiss Scatcherd from a history class, and sent to stand in the middleof the large schoolroom. The punishment seemed to me in a highdegree ignominious, especially for so great a girl- she lookedthirteen or upwards. I expected she would show signs of great distressand shame; but to my surprise she neither wept nor blushed:composed, though grave, she stood, the central mark of all eyes.'How can she bear it so quietly- so firmly?' I asked of myself.'Were I in her place, it seems to me I should wish the earth to openand swallow me up. She looks as if she were thinking of somethingbeyond her punishment- beyond her situation: of something not roundher nor before her. I have heard of day-dreams- is she in aday-dream now? Her eyes are fixed on the floor, but I am sure theydo not see it- her sight seems turned in, gone down into her heart:she is looking at what she can remember, I believe; not at what isreally present. I wonder what sort of a girl she is- whether good ornaughty.'

　　Soon after five P.M. we had another meal, consisting of a small mugof coffee, and half a slice of brown bread. I devoured my bread anddrank my coffee with relish; but I should have been glad of as muchmore- I was still hungry. Half an hour's recreation succeeded, thenstudy; then the glass of water and the piece of oat-cake, prayers, andbed. Such was my first day at Lowood.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER VI--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　THE next day commenced as before, getting up and dressing byrushlight; but this morning we were obliged to dispense with theceremony of washing; the water in the pitchers was frozen. A changehad taken place in the weather the preceding evening, and a keennorth-east wind, whistling through the crevices of our bedroom windowsall night long, had made us shiver in our beds, and turned thecontents of the ewers to ice.

　　Before the long hour and a half of prayers and Bible-reading wasover, I felt ready to perish with cold. Breakfast-time came at last,and this morning the porridge was not burnt; the quality waseatable, the quantity small. How small my portion seemed! I wishedit had been doubled.

　　In the course of the day I was enrolled a member of the fourthclass, and regular tasks and occupations were assigned me: hitherto, Ihad only been a spectator of the proceedings at Lowood; I was now tobecome an actor therein. At first, being little accustomed to learn byheart, the lessons appeared to me both long and difficult; thefrequent change from task to task, too, bewildered me; and I wasglad when, about three o'clock in the afternoon, Miss Smith put intomy hands a border of muslin two yards long, together with needle,thimble, etc., and sent me to sit in a quiet corner of the schoolroom,with directions to hem the same. At that hour most of the otherswere sewing likewise; but one class still stood round Miss Scatcherd'schair reading, and as all was quiet, the subject of their lessonscould be heard, together with the manner in which each girlacquitted herself, and the animadversions or commendations of MissScatcherd on the performance. It was English history: among thereaders I observed my acquaintance of the verandah: at thecommencement of the lesson, her place had been at the top of theclass, but for some error of pronunciation, or some inattention tostops, she was suddenly sent to the very bottom. Even in thatobscure position, Miss Scatcherd continued to make her an object ofconstant notice; she was continually addressing to her such phrases asthe following:-

　　'Burns' (such it seems was her name: the girls here were all calledby their surnames, as boys are elsewhere), 'Burns, you are standing onthe side of your shoe; turn your toes out immediately.' 'Burns, youpoke your chin most unpleasantly; draw it in.' 'Burns, I insist onyour holding your head up; I will not have you before me in thatattitude,' etc. etc.

　　A chapter having been read through twice, the books were closed andthe girls examined. The lesson had comprised part of the reign ofCharles I, and there were sundry questions about tonnage andpoundage and ship-money, which most of them appeared unable to answer;still, every little difficulty was solved instantly when it reachedBurns: her memory seemed to have retained the substance of the wholelesson, and she was ready with answers on every point. I keptexpecting that Miss Scatcherd would praise her attention; but, insteadof that, she suddenly cried out-

　　'You dirty, disagreeable girl! you have never cleaned your nailsthis morning!'

　　Burns made no answer: I wondered at her silence.

　　'Why,' thought I, 'does she not explain that she could neitherclean her nails nor wash her face, as the water was frozen?'

　　My attention was now called off by Miss Smith desiring me to hold askein of thread: while she was winding it, she talked to me fromtime to time, asking whether I had ever been at school before, whetherI could mark, stitch, knit, etc.; till she dismissed me, I could notpursue my observations on Miss Scatcherd's movements. When Ireturned to my seat, that lady was just delivering an order of which Idid not catch the import; but Burns immediately left the class, andgoing into the small inner room where the books were kept, returned inhalf a minute, carrying in her hand a bundle of twigs tied together atone end. This ominous tool she presented to Miss Scatcherd with arespectful curtsey; then she quietly, and without being told, unloosedher pinafore, and the teacher instantly and sharply inflicted on herneck a dozen strokes with the bunch of twigs. Not a tear rose toBurns's eye; and, while I paused from my sewing, because my fingersquivered at this spectacle with a sentiment of unavailing and impotentanger, not a feature of her pensive face altered its ordinaryexpression.

　　'Hardened girl!' exclaimed Miss Scatcherd; 'nothing can correct youof your slatternly habits: carry the rod away.'

　　Burns obeyed: I looked at her narrowly as she emerged from thebook-closet; she was just putting back her handkerchief into herpocket, and the trace of a tear glistened on her thin cheek.

　　The play-hour in the evening I thought the pleasantest fractionof the day at Lowood: the bit of bread, the draught of coffeeswallowed at five o'clock had revived vitality, if it had notsatisfied hunger: the long restraint of the day was slackened; theschoolroom felt warmer than in the morning- its fires being allowed toburn a little more brightly, to supply, in some measure, the placeof candles, not yet introduced: the ruddy gloaming, the licenseduproar, the confusion of many voices gave one a welcome sense ofliberty.

　　On the evening of the day on which I had seen Miss Scatcherd flogher pupil, Burns, I wandered as usual among the forms and tables andlaughing groups without a companion, yet not feeling lonely: when Ipassed the windows, I now and then lifted a blind, and looked out;it snowed fast, a drift was already forming against the lower panes;putting my ear close to the window, I could distinguish from thegleeful tumult within, the disconsolate moan of the wind outside.

　　Probably, if I had lately left a good home and kind parents, thiswould have been the hour when I should most keenly have regrettedthe separation; that wind would then have saddened my heart, thisobscure chaos would have disturbed my peace! as it was, I derived fromboth a strange excitement, and reckless and feverish, I wished thewind to howl more wildly, the gloom to deepen to darkness, and theconfusion to rise to clamour.

　　Jumping over forms, and creeping under tables, I made my way to oneof the fire-places; there, kneeling by the high wire fender, I foundBurns, absorbed, silent, abstracted from all round her by thecompanionship of a book, which she read by the dim glare of theembers.

　　'Is it still Rasselas?' I asked, coming behind her.

　　'Yes,' she said, 'and I have just finished it.'

　　And in five minutes more she shut it up. I was glad of this.

　　'Now,' thought I, 'I can perhaps get her to talk.' I sat down byher on the floor.

　　'What is your name besides Burns?'

　　'Helen.'

　　'Do you come a long way from here?'

　　'I come from a place farther north, quite on the borders ofScotland.'

　　'Will you ever go back?'

　　'I hope so; but nobody can be sure of the future.'

　　'You must wish to leave Lowood?'

　　'No! why should I? I was sent to Lowood to get an education; and itwould be of no use going away until I have attained that object.'

　　'But that teacher, Miss Scatcherd, is so cruel to you?'

　　'Cruel? Not at all! She is severe: she dislikes my faults.'

　　'And if I were in your place I should dislike her; I shouldresist her. If she struck me with that rod, I should get it from herhand; I should break it under her nose.'

　　'Probably you would do nothing of the sort: but if you did, Mr.Brocklehurst would expel you from the school; that would be a greatgrief to your relations. It is far better to endure patiently asmart which nobody feels but yourself, than to commit a hasty actionwhose evil consequences will extend to all connected with you; andbesides, the Bible bids us return good for evil.'

　　'But then it seems disgraceful to be flogged, and to be sent tostand in the middle of a room full of people; and you are such a greatgirl: I am far younger than you, and I could not bear it.'

　　'Yet it would be your duty to bear it, if you could not avoid it:it is weak and silly to say you cannot bear what it is your fate to berequired to bear.'

　　I heard her with wonder: I could not comprehend this doctrine ofendurance; and still less could I understand or sympathise with theforbearance she expressed for her chastiser. Still I felt that HelenBurns considered things by a light invisible to my eyes. I suspectedshe might be right and I wrong; but I would not ponder the matterdeeply; like Felix, I put it off to a more convenient season.

　　'You say you have faults, Helen: what are they? To me you seem verygood.'

　　'Then learn from me, not to judge by appearances: I am, as MissScatcherd said, slatternly; I seldom put, and never keep, things inorder; I am careless; I forget rules; I read when I should learn mylessons; I have no method; and sometimes I say, like you, I cannotbear to be subjected to systematic arrangements. This is all veryprovoking to Miss Scatcherd, who is naturally neat, punctual, andparticular.'

　　'And cross and cruel,' I added; but Helen Burns would not admitmy addition: she kept silence.

　　'Is Miss Temple as severe to you as Miss Scatcherd?'

　　At the utterance of Miss Temple's name, a soft smile flitted overher grave face.

　　'Miss Temple is full of goodness; it pains her to be severe toany one, even the worst in the school: she sees my errors, and tellsme of them gently; and if I do anything worthy of praise, she gives memy meed liberally. One strong proof of my wretchedly defectivenature is, that even her expostulations, so mild, so rational, have noinfluence to cure me of my faults; and even her praise, though I valueit most highly, cannot stimulate me to continued care and foresight.'

　　'That is curious,' said I, 'it is so easy to be careful.'

　　'For you I have no doubt it is. I observed you in your class thismorning, and saw you were closely attentive: your thoughts neverseemed to wander while Miss Miller explained the lesson and questionedyou. Now, mine continually rove away; when I should be listening toMiss Scatcherd, and collecting all she says with assiduity, often Ilose the very sound of her voice; I fall into a sort of dream.Sometimes I think I am in Northumberland, and that the noises I hearround me are the bubbling of a little brook which runs throughDeepden, near our house;- then, when it comes to my turn to reply, Ihave to be awakened; and having heard nothing of what was read forlistening to the visionary brook, I have no answer ready.'

　　'Yet how well you replied this afternoon.'

　　'It was mere chance; the subject on which we had been reading hadinterested me. This afternoon, instead of dreaming of Deepden, I waswondering how a man who wished to do right could act so unjustly andunwisely as Charles the First sometimes did; and I thought what a pityit was that, with his integrity and conscientiousness, he could see nofarther than the prerogatives of the crown. If he had but been able tolook to a distance, and see how what they call the spirit of the agewas tending! Still, I like Charles- I respect him- I pity him, poormurdered king! Yes, his enemies were the worst: they shed blood theyhad no right to shed. How dared they kill him!'

　　Helen was talking to herself now: she had forgotten I could notvery well understand her- that I was ignorant, or nearly so, of thesubject she discussed. I recalled her to my level.

　　'And when Miss Temple teaches you, do your thoughts wander then?'

　　'No, certainly, not often: because Miss Temple has generallysomething to say which is newer than my own reflections; herlanguage is singularly agreeable to me, and the information shecommunicates is often just what I wished to gain.'

　　'Well, then, with Miss Temple you are good?'

　　'Yes, in a passive way: I make no effort; I follow as inclinationguides me. There is no merit in such goodness.'

　　'A great deal: you are good to those who are good to you. It is allI ever desire to be. If people were always kind and obedient tothose who are cruel and unjust, the wicked people would have it alltheir own way: they would never feel afraid, and so they would neveralter, but would grow worse and worse. When we are struck at without areason, we should strike back again very hard; I am sure we should- sohard as to teach the person who struck us never to do it again.'

　　'You will change your mind, I hope, when you grow older: as yet youare but a little untaught girl.'

　　'But I feel this, Helen; I must dislike those who, whatever I do toplease them, persist in disliking me; I must resist those who punishme unjustly. It is as natural as that I should love those who showme affection, or submit to punishment when I feel it is deserved.'

　　'Heathens and savage tribes hold that doctrine, but Christiansand civilised nations disown it.'

　　'How? I don't understand.'

　　'It is not violence that best overcomes hate- nor vengeance thatmost certainly heals injury.'

　　'What then?'

　　'Read the New Testament, and observe what Christ says, and how Heacts; make His word your rule, and His conduct your example.'

　　'What does He say?'

　　'Love your enemies; bless them that curse you; do good to them thathate you and despitefully use you.'

　　'Then I should love Mrs. Reed, which I cannot do; I should blessher son John, which is impossible.'

　　In her turn, Helen Burns asked me to explain, and I proceededforthwith to pour out, in my own way, the tale of my sufferings andresentments. Bitter and truculent when excited, I spoke as I felt,without reserve or softening.

　　Helen heard me patiently to the end: I expected she would then makea remark, but she said nothing.

　　'Well,' I asked impatiently, 'is not Mrs. Reed a hard-hearted,bad woman?'

　　'She has been unkind to you, no doubt; because you see, shedislikes your cast of character, as Miss Scatcherd does mine; buthow minutely you remember all she has done and said to you! What asingularly deep impression her injustice seems to have made on yourheart! No ill-usage so brands its record on my feelings. Would you notbe happier if you tried to forget her severity, together with thepassionate emotions it excited? Life appears to me too short to bespent in nursing animosity or registering wrongs. We are, and must be,one and all, burdened with faults in this world: but the time willsoon come when, I trust, we shall put them off in putting off ourcorruptible bodies; when debasement and sin will fall from us withthis cumbrous frame of flesh, and only the spark of the spirit willremain,- the impalpable principle of light and thought, pure as whenit left the Creator to inspire the creature: whence it came it willreturn; perhaps again to be communicated to some being higher thanman- perhaps to pass through gradations of glory, from the palehuman soul to brighten to the seraph! Surely it Will never, on thecontrary, be suffered to degenerate from man to fiend? No; I cannotbelieve that: I hold another creed: which no one ever taught me, andwhich I seldom mention; but in which I delight, and to which Icling: for it extends hope to all: it makes Eternity a rest- amighty home, not a terror and an abyss. Besides, with this creed, Ican so clearly distinguish between the criminal and his crime; I canso sincerely forgive the first while I abhor the last: with this creedrevenge never worries my heart, degradation never too deeplydisgusts me, injustice never crushes me too low: I live in calm,looking to the end.'

　　Helen's head, always drooping, sank a little lower as shefinished this sentence. I saw by her look she wished no longer to talkto me, but rather to converse with her own thoughts. She was notallowed much time for meditation: a monitor, a great rough girl,presently came up, exclaiming in a strong Cumberland accent-

　　'Helen Burns, if you don't go and put your drawer in order, andfold up your work this minute, I'll tell Miss Scatcherd to come andlook at it!'

　　Helen sighed as her reverie fled, and getting up, obeyed themonitor without reply as without delay.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER VII--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　MY first quarter at Lowood seemed an age; and not the golden ageeither; it comprised an irksome struggle with difficulties inhabituating myself to new rules and unwonted tasks. The fear offailure in these points harassed me worse than the physicalhardships of my lot; though these were no trifles.

　　During January, February, and part of March, the deep snows, and,after their melting, the almost impassable roads, prevented ourstirring beyond the garden walls, except to go to church; but withinthese limits we had to pass an hour every day in the open air. Ourclothing was insufficient to protect us from the severe cold: we hadno boots, the snow got into our shoes and melted there: our unglovedhands became numbed and covered with chilblains, as were our feet: Iremember well the distracting irritation I endured from this causeevery evening, when my feet inflamed; and the torture of thrusting theswelled, raw, and stiff toes into my shoes in the morning. Then thescanty supply of food was distressing: with the keen appetites ofgrowing children, we had scarcely sufficient to keep alive adelicate invalid. From this deficiency of nourishment resulted anabuse, which pressed hardly on the younger pupils: whenever thefamished great girls had an opportunity, they would coax or menace thelittle ones out of their portion. Many a time I have shared betweentwo claimants the precious morsel of brown bread distributed atteatime; and after relinquishing to a third half the contents of mymug of coffee, I have swallowed the remainder with an accompaniment ofsecret tears, forced from me by the exigency of hunger.

　　Sundays were dreary days in that wintry season. We had to walktwo miles to Brocklebridge Church, where our patron officiated. We setout cold, we arrived at church colder: during the morning service webecame almost paralysed. It was too far to return to dinner, and anallowance of cold meat and bread, in the same penurious proportionobserved in our ordinary meals, was served round between the services.

　　At the close of the afternoon service we returned by an exposed andhilly road, where the bitter winter wind, blowing over a range ofsnowy summits to the north, almost flayed the skin from our faces.

　　I can remember Miss Temple walking lightly and rapidly along ourdrooping line, her plaid cloak, which the frosty wind fluttered,gathered close about her, and encouraging us, by precept andexample, to keep up our spirits, and march forward, as she said, 'likestalwart soldiers.' The other teachers, poor things, were generallythemselves too much dejected to attempt the task of cheering others.

　　How we longed for the light and heat of a blazing fire when wegot back! But, to the little ones at least, this was denied: eachhearth in the schoolroom was immediately surrounded by a double row ofgreat girls, and behind them the younger children crouched ingroups, wrapping their starved arms in their pinafores.

　　A little solace came at tea-time, in the shape of a double rationof bread- a whole, instead of a half, slice- with the deliciousaddition of a thin scrape of butter: it was the hebdomadal treat towhich we all looked forward from Sabbath to Sabbath. I generallycontrived to reserve a moiety of this bounteous repast for myself; butthe remainder I was invariably obliged to part with.

　　The Sunday evening was spent in repeating, by heart, the ChurchCatechism, and the fifth, sixth, and seventh chapters of St.Matthew; and in listening to a long sermon, read by Miss Miller, whoseirrepressible yawns attested her weariness. A frequent interlude ofthese performances was the enactment of the part of Eutychus by somehalf-dozen of little girls, who, overpowered with sleep, would falldown, if not out of the third loft, yet off the fourth form, and betaken up half dead. The remedy was, to thrust them forward into thecentre of the schoolroom, and oblige them to stand there till thesermon was finished. Sometimes their feet failed them, and they sanktogether in a heap; they were then propped up with the monitors'high stools.

　　I have not yet alluded to the visits of Mr. Brocklehurst; andindeed that gentleman was from home during the greater part of thefirst month after my arrival; perhaps prolonging his stay with hisfriend the archdeacon: his absence was a relief to me. I need notsay that I had my own reasons for dreading his coming: but come he didat last.

　　One afternoon (I had then been three weeks at Lowood), as I wassitting with a slate in my hand, puzzling over a sum in long division,my eyes, raised in abstraction to the window, caught sight of a figurejust passing: I recognised almost instinctively that gaunt outline;and when, two minutes after, all the school, teachers included, roseen masse, it was not necessary for me to look up in order to ascertainwhose entrance they thus greeted. A long stride measured theschoolroom, and presently beside Miss Temple, who herself had risen,stood the same black column which had frowned on me so ominouslyfrom the hearthrug of Gateshead. I now glanced sideways at thispiece of architecture. Yes, I was right: it was Mr. Brocklehurst,buttoned up in a surtout, and looking longer, narrower, and more rigidthan ever.

　　I had my own reasons for being dismayed at this apparition; toowell I remembered the perfidious hints given by Mrs. Reed about mydisposition, etc.; the promise pledged by Mr. Brocklehurst toapprise Miss Temple and the teachers of my vicious nature. All along Ihad been dreading the fulfilment of this promise,- I had beenlooking out daily for the 'Coming Man,' whose information respectingmy past life and conversation was to brand me as a bad child for ever:now there he was.

　　He stood at Miss Temple's side; he was speaking low in her ear: Idid not doubt he was making disclosures of my villainy; and Iwatched her eye with painful anxiety, expecting every moment to seeits dark orb turn on me a glance of repugnance and contempt. Ilistened too; and as I happened to be seated quite at the top of theroom, I caught most of what he said: its import relieved me fromimmediate apprehension.

　　'I suppose, Miss Temple, the thread I bought at Lowton will do;it struck me that it would be just of the quality for the calicochemises, and I sorted the needles to match. You may tell Miss Smiththat I forgot to make a memorandum of the darning needles, but sheshall have some papers sent in next week; and she is not, on anyaccount, to give out more than one at a time to each pupil: if theyhave more, they are apt to be careless and lose them. And, O ma'am!I wish the woollen stockings were better looked to!- when I was herelast, I went into the kitchen-garden and examined the clothes dryingon the line; there was a quantity of black hose in a very bad state ofrepair: from the size of the holes in them I was sure they had notbeen well mended from time to time.'

　　He paused.

　　'Your directions shall be attended to, sir,' said Miss Temple.

　　'And, ma'am,' he continued, 'the laundress tells me some of thegirls have two clean tuckers in the week: it is too much; the ruleslimit them to one.'

　　'I think I can explain that circumstance, sir. Agnes andCatherine Johnstone were invited to take tea with some friends atLowton last Thursday, and I gave them leave to put on clean tuckersfor the occasion.'

　　Mr. Brocklehurst nodded.

　　'Well, for once it may pass; but please not to let the circumstanceoccur too often. And there is another thing which surprised me; Ifind, in settling accounts with the housekeeper, that a lunch,consisting of bread and cheese, has twice been served out to the girlsduring the past fortnight. How is this? I looked over the regulations,and I find no such meal as lunch mentioned. Who introduced thisinnovation? and by what authority?'

　　'I must be responsible for the circumstance, sir,' replied MissTemple: 'the breakfast was so ill prepared that the pupils could notpossibly eat it; and I dared not allow them to remain fasting tilldinner-time.'

　　'Madam, allow me an instant. You are aware that my plan in bringingup these girls is, not to accustom them to habits of luxury andindulgence, but to render them hardy, patient, self-denying. Shouldany little accidental disappointment of the appetite occur, such asthe spoiling of a meal, the under or the over dressing of a dish,the incident ought not to be neutralised by replacing with somethingmore delicate the comfort lost, thus pampering the body andobviating the aim of this institution; it ought to be improved tothe spiritual edification of the pupils, by encouraging them to evincefortitude under the temporary privation. A brief address on thoseoccasions would not be mistimed, wherein a judicious instructorwould take the opportunity of referring to the sufferings of theprimitive Christians; to the torments of martyrs; to theexhortations of our blessed Lord Himself, calling upon His disciplesto take up their cross and follow Him; to His warnings that manshall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth outof the mouth of God; to His divine consolations, "If ye sufferhunger or thirst for My sake, happy are ye." Oh, madam, when you putbread and cheese, instead of burnt porridge, into these children'smouths, you may indeed feed their vile bodies, but you little thinkhow you starve their immortal souls!'

　　Mr. Brocklehurst again paused- perhaps overcome by his feelings.Miss Temple had looked down when he first began to speak to her; butshe now gazed straight before her, and her face, naturally pale asmarble, appeared to be assuming also the coldness and fixity of thatmaterial; especially her mouth, closed as if it would have requireda sculptor's chisel to open it, and her brow settled gradually intopetrified severity.

　　Meantime, Mr. Brocklehurst, standing on the hearth with his handsbehind his back, majestically surveyed the whole school. Suddenlyhis eye gave a blink, as if it had met something that either dazzledor shocked its pupil; turning, he said in more rapid accents than hehad hitherto used-

　　'Miss Temple, Miss Temple, what- what is that girl with curledhair? Red hair, ma'am, curled- curled all over?' And extending hiscane he pointed to the awful object, his hand shaking as he did so.

　　'It is Julia Severn,' replied Miss Temple, very quietly.

　　'Julia Severn, ma'am! And why has she, or any other, curled hair?Why, in defiance of every precept and principle of this house, doesshe conform to the world so openly- here in an evangelical, charitableestablishment- as to wear her hair one mass of curls?'

　　'Julia's hair curls naturally,' returned Miss Temple, still morequietly.

　　'Naturally! Yes, but we are not to conform to nature; I wishthese girls to be the children of Grace: and why that abundance? Ihave again and again intimated that I desire the hair to be arrangedclosely, modestly, plainly. Miss Temple, that girl's hair must becut off entirely; I will send a barber tomorrow: and I see otherswho have far too much of the excrescence- that tall girl, tell herto turn round. Tell all the first form to rise up and direct theirfaces to the wall.'

　　Miss Temple passed her handkerchief over her lips, as if tosmooth away the involuntary smile that curled them; she gave theorder, however, and when the first class could take in what wasrequired of them, they obeyed. Leaning a little back on my bench, Icould see the looks and grimaces with which they commented on thismanoeuvre: it was a pity Mr. Brocklehurst could not see them too; hewould perhaps have felt that, whatever he might do with the outside ofthe cup and platter, the inside was further beyond his interferencethan he imagined.

　　He scrutinised the reverse of these living medals some fiveminutes, then pronounced sentence. These words fell like the knellof doom-

　　'All those top-knots must be cut off.'

　　Miss Temple seemed to remonstrate.

　　'Madam,' he pursued, 'I have a Master to serve whose kingdom is notof this world: my mission is to mortify in these girls the lusts ofthe flesh; to teach them to clothe themselves with shame-facedness andsobriety, not with braided hair and costly apparel; and each of theyoung persons before us has a string of hair twisted in plaits whichvanity itself might have woven; these, I repeat, must be cut off;think of the time wasted, of-'

　　Mr. Brocklehurst was here interrupted: three other visitors,ladies, now entered the room. They ought to have come a littlesooner to have heard his lecture on dress, for they were splendidlyattired in velvet, silk, and furs. The two younger of the trio (finegirls of sixteen and seventeen) had grey beaver hats, then in fashion,shaded with ostrich plumes, and from under the brim of this gracefulhead-dress fell a profusion of light tresses, elaborately curled;the elder lady was enveloped in a costly velvet shawl, trimmed withermine, and she wore a false front of French curls.

　　These ladies were deferentially received by Miss Temple, as Mrs.and the Misses Brocklehurst, and conducted to seats of honour at thetop of the room. It seems they had come in the carriage with theirreverend relative, and had been conducting a rummaging scrutiny of theroom upstairs, while he transacted business with the housekeeper,questioned the laundress, and lectured the superintendent. They nowproceeded to address divers remarks and reproofs to Miss Smith, whowas charged with the care of the linen and the inspection of thedormitories: but I had no time to listen to what they said; othermatters called off and enchained my attention.

　　Hitherto, while gathering up the discourse of Mr. Brocklehurstand Miss Temple, I had not, at the same time, neglected precautions tosecure my personal safety; which I thought would be effected, if Icould only elude observation. To this end, I had sat well back onthe form, and while seeming to be busy with my sum, had held myslate in such a manner as to conceal my face: I might have escapednotice, had not my treacherous slate somehow happened to slip frommy hand, and falling with an obtrusive crash, directly drawn every eyeupon me; I knew it was all over now, and, as I stooped to pick upthe two fragments of slate, I rallied my forces for the worst. Itcame.

　　'A careless girl!' said Mr. Brocklehurst, and immediately after-'It is the new pupil, I perceive.' And before I could draw breath,'I must not forget I have a word to say respecting her.' Then aloud:how loud it seemed to me! 'Let the child who broke her slate comeforward!'

　　Of my own accord I could not have stirred; I was paralysed: but thetwo great girls who sat on each side of me, set me on my legs andpushed me towards the dread judge, and then Miss Temple gentlyassisted me to his very feet, and I caught her whispered counsel-

　　'Don't be afraid, Jane, I saw it was an accident; you shall notbe punished.'

　　The kind whisper went to my heart like a dagger.

　　'Another minute, and she will despise me for a hypocrite,'thought I; and an impulse of fury against Reed, Brocklehurst, andCo. bounded in my pulses at the conviction. I was no Helen Burns.

　　'Fetch that stool,' said Mr. Brocklehurst, pointing to a veryhigh one from which a monitor had just risen: it was brought.

　　'Place the child upon it.'

　　And I was placed there, by whom I don't know: I was in no conditionto note particulars; I was only aware that they had hoisted me up tothe height of Mr. Brocklehurst's nose, that he was within a yard ofme, and that a spread of shot orange and purple silk pelisses and acloud of silvery plumage extended and waved below me.

　　Mr. Brocklehurst hemmed.

　　'Ladies,' said he, turning to his family, 'Miss Temple, teachers,and children, you all see this girl?'

　　Of course they did; for I felt their eyes directed likeburning-glasses against my scorched skin.

　　'You see she is yet young; you observe she possesses the ordinaryform of childhood; God has graciously given her the shape that Hehas given to all of us; no signal deformity points her out as a markedcharacter. Who would think that the Evil One had already found aservant and agent in her? Yet such, I grieve to say, is the case.'

　　A pause- in which I began to steady the palsy of my nerves, andto feel that the Rubicon was passed; and that the trial, no longerto be shirked, must be firmly sustained.

　　'My dear children,' pursued the black marble clergyman, withpathos, 'this is a sad, a melancholy occasion; for it becomes myduty to warn you, that this girl, who might be one of God's own lambs,is a little castaway: not a member of the true flock, but evidently aninterloper and an alien. You must be on your guard against her; youmust shun her example; if necessary, avoid her company, exclude herfrom your sports, and shut her out from your converse. Teachers, youmust watch her: keep your eyes on her movements, weigh well her words,scrutinise her actions, punish her body to save her soul: if,indeed, such salvation be possible, for (my tongue falters while Itell it) this girl, this child, the native of a Christian land,worse than many a little heathen who says its prayers to Brahma andkneels before Juggernaut- this girl is- a liar!'

　　Now came a pause of ten minutes, during which I, by this time inperfect possession of my wits, observed all the female Brocklehurstsproduce their pocket-handkerchiefs and apply them to their optics,while the elderly lady swayed herself to and fro, and the twoyounger ones whispered, 'How shocking!'

　　Mr. Brocklehurst resumed.

　　'This I learned from her benefactress; from the pious andcharitable lady who adopted her in her orphan state, reared her as herown daughter, and whose kindness, whose generosity the unhappy girlrepaid by an ingratitude so bad, so dreadful, that at last herexcellent patroness was obliged to separate her from her own youngones, fearful lest her vicious example should contaminate theirpurity: she has sent her here to be healed, even as the Jews of oldsent their diseased to the troubled pool of Bethesda; and, teachers,superintendent, I beg of you not to allow the waters to stagnate roundher.'

　　With this sublime conclusion, Mr. Brocklehurst adjusted the topbutton of his surtout, muttered something to his family, who rose,bowed to Miss Temple, and then all the great people sailed in statefrom the room. Turning at the door, my judge said-

　　'Let her stand half an hour longer on that stool, and let no onespeak to her during the remainder of the day.'

　　There was I, then, mounted aloft; I, who had said I could notbear the shame of standing on my natural feet in the middle of theroom, was now exposed to general view on a pedestal of infamy. What mysensations were, no language can describe; but just as they allrose, stifling my breath and constricting my throat, a girl came upand passed me: in passing, she lifted her eyes. What a strange lightinspired them! What an extraordinary sensation that ray sent throughme! How the new feeling bore me up! It was as if a martyr, a hero, hadpassed a slave or victim, and imparted strength in the transit. Imastered the rising hysteria, lifted up my head, and took a firm standon the stool. Helen Burns asked some slight questions about her workof Miss Smith, was chidden for the triviality of the inquiry, returnedto her place, and smiled at me as she again went by. What a smile! Iremember it now, and I know that it was the effluence of fineintellect, of true courage; it lit up her marked lineaments, herthin face, her sunken grey eye, like a reflection from the aspect ofan angel. Yet at that moment Helen Burns wore on her arm 'the untidybadge;' scarcely an hour ago I had heard her condemned by MissScatcherd to a dinner of bread and water on the morrow because she hadblotted an exercise in copying it out. Such is the imperfect nature ofman! such spots are there on the disc of the clearest planet; and eyeslike Miss Scatcherd's can only see those minute defects, and are blindto the full brightness of the orb.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER VIII

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　ERE the half-hour ended, five o'clock struck; school was dismissed,and all were gone into the refectory to tea. I now ventured todescend: it was deep dusk; I retired into a corner and sat down on thefloor. The spell by which I had been so far supported began todissolve; reaction took place, and soon, so overwhelming was the griefthat seized me, I sank prostrate with my face to the ground. Now Iwept: Helen Burns was not here; nothing sustained me; left to myself Iabandoned myself, and my tears watered the boards. I had meant to beso good, and to do so much at Lowood: to make so many friends, to earnrespect and win affection. Already I had made visible progress; thatvery morning I had reached the head of my class; Miss Miller hadpraised me warmly; Miss Temple had smiled approbation; she hadpromised to teach me drawing, and to let me learn French, if Icontinued to make similar improvement two months longer: and then Iwas well received by my fellow-pupils; treated as an equal by those ofmy own age, and not molested by any; now, here I lay again crushed andtrodden on; and could I ever rise more?

　　'Never,' I thought; and ardently I wished to die. While sobbing outthis wish in broken accents, some one approached: I started up-again Helen Burns was near me; the fading fires just showed her comingup the long, vacant room; she brought my coffee and bread.

　　'Come, eat something,' she said; but I put both away from me,feeling as if a drop or a crumb would have choked me in my presentcondition. Helen regarded me, probably with surprise: I could notnow abate my agitation, though I tried hard; I continued to weepaloud. She sat down on the ground near me, embraced her knees with herarms, and rested her head upon them; in that attitude she remainedsilent as an Indian. I was the first who spoke-

　　'Helen, why do you stay with a girl whom everybody believes to be aliar?'

　　'Everybody, Jane? Why, there are only eighty people who haveheard you called so, and the world contains hundreds of millions.'

　　'But what have I to do with millions? The eighty, I know, despiseme.'

　　'Jane, you are mistaken: probably not one in the school eitherdespises or dislikes you: many, I am sure, pity you much.'

　　'How can they pity me after what Mr. Brocklehurst has said?'

　　'Mr. Brocklehurst is not a god: nor is he even a great andadmired man; he is little liked here; he never took steps to makehimself liked. Had he treated you as an especial favourite, youwould have found enemies, declared or covert, all around you; as itis, the greater number would offer you sympathy if they dared.Teachers and pupils may look coldly on you for a day or two, butfriendly feelings are concealed in their hearts; and if youpersevere in doing well, these feelings will ere long appear so muchthe more evidently for their temporary suppression. Besides, Jane'-she paused.

　　'Well, Helen?' said I, putting my hand into hers: she chafed myfingers gently to warm them, and went on-

　　'If all the world hated you, and believed you wicked, while yourown conscience approved you, and absolved you from guilt, you wouldnot be without friends.'

　　'No; I know I should think well of myself; but that is notenough: if others don't love me I would rather die than live- I cannotbear to be solitary and hated, Helen. Look here; to gain some realaffection from you, or Miss Temple, or any other whom I truly love,I would willingly submit to have the bone of my arm broken, or tolet a bull toss me, or to stand behind a kicking horse, and let itdash its hoof at my chest-'

　　'Hush, Jane! you think too much of the love of human beings; youare too impulsive, too vehement; the sovereign hand that createdyour frame, and put life into it, has provided you with otherresources than your feeble self, or than creatures feeble as you.Besides this earth, and besides the race of men, there is an invisibleworld and a kingdom of spirits: that world is round us, for it iseverywhere; and those spirits watch us, for they are commissioned toguard us; and if we were dying in pain and shame, if scorn smote us onall sides, and hatred crushed us, angels see our tortures, recogniseour innocence (if innocent we be: as I know you are of this chargewhich Mr. Brocklehurst has weakly and pompously repeated at secondhandfrom Mrs. Reed; for I read a sincere nature in your ardent eyes and onyour clear front), and God waits only the separation of spirit fromflesh to crown us with a full reward. Why, then, should we ever sinkoverwhelmed with distress, when life is so soon over, and death isso certain an entrance to happiness- to glory?'

　　I was silent; Helen had calmed me; but in the tranquillity sheimparted there was an alloy of inexpressible sadness. I felt theimpression of woe as she spoke, but I could not tell whence it came;and when, having done speaking, she breathed a little fast and cougheda short cough, I momentarily forgot my own sorrows to yield to a vagueconcern for her.

　　Resting my head on Helen's shoulder, I put my arms round her waist;she drew me to her, and we reposed in silence. We had not sat longthus, when another person came in. Some heavy clouds, swept from thesky by a rising wind, had left the moon bare; and her light, streamingin through a window near, shone full both on us and on the approachingfigure, which we at once recognised as Miss Temple.

　　'I came on purpose to find you, Jane Eyre,' said she; 'I want youin my room; and as Helen Burns is with you, she may come too.'

　　We went; following the superintendent's guidance, we had tothread some intricate passages, and mount a staircase before wereached her apartment; it contained a good fire, and lookedcheerful. Miss Temple told Helen Burns to be seated in a low arm-chairon one side of the hearth, and herself taking another, she called meto her side.

　　'Is it all over?' she asked, looking down at my face. 'Have youcried your grief away?'

　　'I am afraid I never shall do that.'

　　'Why?'

　　'Because I have been wrongly accused; and you, ma'am, and everybodyelse, will now think me wicked.'

　　'We shall think you what you prove yourself to be, my child.Continue to act as a good girl, and you will satisfy us.'

　　'Shall I, Miss Temple?'

　　'You will,' said she, passing her arm round me. 'And now tell mewho is the lady whom Mr. Brocklehurst called your benefactress?'

　　'Mrs. Reed, my uncle's wife. My uncle is dead, and he left me toher care.'

　　'Did she not, then, adopt you of her own accord?'

　　'No, ma'am; she was sorry to have to do it: but my uncle, as I haveoften heard the servants say, got her to promise before he died thatshe would always keep me.'

　　'Well now, Jane, you know, or at least I will tell you, that when acriminal is accused, he is always allowed to speak in his own defence.You have been charged with falsehood; defend yourself to me as well asyou can. Say whatever your memory suggests as true; but add nothingand exaggerate nothing.'

　　I resolved, in the depth of my heart, that I would be mostmoderate- most correct; and, having reflected a few minutes in orderto arrange coherently what I had to say, I told her all the story ofmy sad childhood. Exhausted by emotion, my language was more subduedthan it generally was when it developed that sad theme; and mindful ofHelen's warnings against the indulgence of resentment, I infusedinto the narrative far less of gall and wormwood than ordinary. Thusrestrained and simplified, it sounded more credible: I felt as Iwent on that Miss Temple fully believed me.

　　In the course of the tale I had mentioned Mr. Lloyd as havingcome to see me after the fit: for I never forgot the, to me, frightfulepisode of the red-room: in detailing which, my excitement was sure,in some degree, to break bounds; for nothing could soften in myrecollection the spasm of agony which clutched my heart when Mrs. Reedspurned my wild supplication for pardon, and locked me a second timein the dark and haunted chamber.

　　I had finished: Miss Temple regarded me a few minutes in silence;she then said-

　　'I know something of Mr. Lloyd; I shall write to him; if hisreply agrees with your statement, you shall be publicly cleared fromevery imputation; to me, Jane, you are clear now.'

　　She kissed me, and still keeping me at her side (where I was wellcontented to stand for I derived a child's pleasure from thecontemplation of her face, her dress, her one or two ornaments, herwhite forehead, her clustered and shining curls, and beaming darkeyes), she proceeded to address Helen Burns.

　　'How are you to-night, Helen? Have you coughed much to-day?'

　　'Not quite so much, I think, ma'am.'

　　'And the pain in your chest?'

　　'It is a little better.'

　　Miss Temple got up, took her hand and examined her pulse; thenshe returned to her own seat: as she resumed it, I heard her sigh low.She was pensive a few minutes, then rousing herself, she saidcheerfully-

　　'But you two are my visitors to-night; I must treat you as such.'She rang her bell.

　　'Barbara,' she said to the servant who answered it, 'I have not yethad tea; bring the tray and place cups for these two young ladies.'

　　And a tray was soon brought. How pretty, to my eyes, did thechina cups and bright teapot look, placed on the little round tablenear the fire! How fragrant was the steam of the beverage, and thescent of the toast! of which, however, I, to my dismay (for I wasbeginning to be hungry), discerned only a very small portion: MissTemple discerned it too.

　　'Barbara,' said she, 'can you not bring a little more bread andbutter? There is not enough for three.'

　　Barbara went out: she returned soon-

　　'Madam, Mrs. Harden says she has sent up the usual quantity.'

　　Mrs. Harden, be it observed, was the housekeeper: a woman after Mr.Brocklehurst's own heart, made up of equal parts of whalebone andiron.

　　'Oh, very well!' returned Miss Temple; 'we must make it do,Barbara, I suppose.' And as the girl withdrew she added, smiling,'Fortunately, I have it in my power to supply deficiencies for thisonce.'

　　Having invited Helen and me to approach the table, and placedbefore each of us a cup of tea with one delicious but thin morsel oftoast, she got up, unlocked a drawer, and taking from it a parcelwrapped in paper, disclosed presently to our eyes a good-sizedseed-cake.

　　'I meant to give each of you some of this to take with you,' saidshe, 'but as there is so little toast, you must have it now,' andshe proceeded to cut slices with a generous hand.

　　We feasted that evening as on nectar and ambrosia; and not theleast delight of the entertainment was the smile of gratification withwhich our hostess regarded us, as we satisfied our famishedappetites on the delicate fare she liberally supplied.

　　Tea over and the tray removed, she again summoned us to the fire;we sat one on each side of her, and now a conversation followedbetween her and Helen, which it was indeed a privilege to beadmitted to hear.

　　Miss Temple had always something of serenity in her air, of statein her mien, of refined propriety in her language, which precludeddeviation into the ardent, the excited, the eager: something whichchastened the pleasure of those who looked on her and listened to her,by a controlling sense of awe; and such was my feeling now: but asto Helen Burns, I was struck with wonder.

　　The refreshing meal, the brilliant fire, the presence andkindness of her beloved instructress, or, perhaps, more than allthese, something in her own unique mind, had roused her powerswithin her. They woke, they kindled: first, they glowed in thebright tint of her cheek, which till this hour I had never seen butpale and bloodless; then they shone in the liquid lustre of hereyes, which had suddenly acquired a beauty more singular than thatof Miss Temple's- a beauty neither of fine colour nor long eyelash,nor pencilled brow, but of meaning, of movement, of radiance. Then hersoul sat on her lips, and language flowed, from what source I cannottell. Has a girl of fourteen a heart large enough, vigorous enough, tohold the swelling spring of pure, full, fervid eloquence? Such was thecharacteristic of Helen's discourse on that, to me, memorable evening;her spirit seemed hastening to live within a very brief span as muchas many live during a protracted existence.

　　They conversed of things I had never heard of; of nations and timespast; of countries far away; of secrets of nature discovered orguessed at: they spoke of books: how many they had read! What storesof knowledge they possessed! Then they seemed so familiar withFrench names and French authors: but my amazement reached its climaxwhen Miss Temple asked Helen if she sometimes snatched a moment torecall the Latin her father had taught her, and taking a book from ashelf, bade her read and construe a page of Virgil; and Helenobeyed, my organ of veneration expanding at every sounding line. Shehad scarcely finished ere the bell announced bedtime! no delay couldbe admitted; Miss Temple embraced us both, saying, as she drew us toher heart-

　　'God bless you, my children!'

　　Helen she held a little longer than me: she let her go morereluctantly; it was Helen her eye followed to the door; it was for hershe a second time breathed a sad sigh; for her she wiped a tear fromher cheek.

　　On reaching the bedroom, we heard the voice of Miss Scatcherd:she was examining drawers; she had just pulled out Helen Burns's,and when we entered Helen was greeted with a sharp reprimand, and toldthat to-morrow she should have half a dozen of untidily foldedarticles pinned to her shoulder.

　　'My things were indeed in shameful disorder,' murmured Helen to me,in a low voice: 'I intended to have arranged them, but I forgot.'

　　Next morning, Miss Scatcherd wrote in conspicuous characters on apiece of pasteboard the word 'Slattern,' and bound it like aphylactery round Helen's large, mild, intelligent, andbenign-looking forehead. She wore it till evening, patient,unresentful, regarding it as a deserved punishment. The moment MissScatcherd withdrew after afternoon school, I ran to Helen, tore itoff, and thrust it into the fire: the fury of which she wasincapable had been burning in my soul all day, and tears, hot andlarge, had continually been scalding my cheek; for the spectacle ofher sad resignation gave me an intolerable pain at the heart.

　　About a week subsequently to the incidents above narrated, MissTemple, who had written to Mr. Lloyd, received his answer: it appearedthat what he said went to corroborate my account. Miss Temple,having assembled the whole school, announced that inquiry had beenmade into the charges alleged against Jane Eyre, and that she was mosthappy to be able to pronounce her completely cleared from everyimputation. The teachers then shook hands with me and kissed me, and amurmur of pleasure ran through the ranks of my companions.

　　Thus relieved of a grievous load, I from that hour set to workafresh, resolved to pioneer my way through every difficulty: Itoiled hard, and my success was proportionate to my efforts; mymemory, not naturally tenacious, improved with practice; exercisesharpened my wits; in a few weeks I was promoted to a higher class; inless than two months I was allowed to commence French and drawing. Ilearned the first two tenses of the verb Etre, and sketched my firstcottage (whose walls, by the bye, outrivalled in slope those of theleaning tower of Pisa), on the same day. That night, on going tobed, I forgot to prepare in imagination the Barmecide supper of hotroast potatoes, or white bread and new milk, with which I was wontto amuse my inward cravings: I feasted instead on the spectacle ofideal drawings, which I saw in the dark; all the work of my own hands:freely pencilled houses and trees, picturesque rocks and ruins,Cuyp-like groups of cattle, sweet paintings of butterflies hoveringover unblown roses, of birds picking at ripe cherries, of wrens' nestsenclosing pearl-like eggs, wreathed about with young ivy sprays. Iexamined, too, in thought, the possibility of my ever being able totranslate currently a certain little French story which Madame Pierrothad that day shown me; nor was that problem solved to mysatisfaction ere I fell sweetly asleep.

　　Well has Solomon said- 'Better is a dinner of herbs where loveis, than a stalled ox and hatred therewith.'

　　I would not now have exchanged Lowood with all its privations forGateshead and its daily luxuries.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER IX

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　BUT the privations, or rather the hardships, of Lowood lessened.Spring drew on: she was indeed already come; the frosts of winterhad ceased; its snows were melted, its cutting winds ameliorated. Mywretched feet, flayed and swollen to lameness by the sharp air ofJanuary, began to heal and subside under the gentler breathings ofApril; the nights and mornings no longer by their Canadian temperaturefroze the very blood in our veins; we could now endure the play-hourpassed in the garden: sometimes on a sunny day it began even to bepleasant and genial, and a greenness grew over those brown beds,which, freshening daily, suggested the thought that Hope traversedthem at night, and left each morning brighter traces of her steps.Flowers peeped out amongst the leaves; snowdrops, crocuses, purpleauriculas, and golden-eyed pansies. On Thursday afternoons(half-holidays) we now took walks, and found still sweeter flowersopening by the wayside, under the hedges.

　　I discovered, too, that a great pleasure, an enjoyment which thehorizon only bounded, lay all outside the high and spike-guarded wallsof our garden: this pleasure consisted in prospect of noble summitsgirdling a great hill-hollow, rich in verdure and shadow; in abright beck, full of dark stones and sparkling eddies. How differenthad this scene looked when I viewed it laid out beneath the iron skyof winter, stiffened in frost, shrouded with snow!- when mists aschill as death wandered to the impulse of east winds along thosepurple peaks, and rolled down 'ing' and holm till they blended withthe frozen fog of the beck! That beck itself was then a torrent,turbid and curbless: it tore asunder the wood, and sent a raving soundthrough the air, often thickened with wild rain or whirling sleet; andfor the forest on its banks, that showed only ranks of skeletons.

　　April advanced to May: a bright, serene May it was; days of bluesky, placid sunshine, and soft western or southern gales filled up itsduration. And now vegetation matured with vigour; Lowood shook looseits tresses; it became all green, all flowery; its great elm, ash, andoak skeletons were restored to majestic life; woodland plants sprangup profusely in its recesses; unnumbered varieties of moss filledits hollows, and it made a strange ground-sunshine out of the wealthof its wild primrose plants: I have seen their pale gold gleam inovershadowed spots like scatterings of the sweetest lustre. All this Ienjoyed often and fully, free, unwatched, and almost alone: for thisunwonted liberty and pleasure there was a cause, to which it nowbecomes my task to advert.

　　Have I not described a pleasant site for a dwelling, when I speakof it as bosomed in hill and wood, and rising from the verge of astream? Assuredly, pleasant enough: but whether healthy or not isanother question.

　　That forest-dell, where Lowood lay, was the cradle of fog andfog-bred pestilence; which, quickening with the quickening spring,crept into the Orphan Asylum, breathed typhus through its crowdedschoolroom and dormitory, and, ere May arrived, transformed theseminary into an hospital.

　　Semi-starvation and neglected colds had predisposed most of thepupils to receive infection: forty-five out of the eighty girls layill at one time. Classes were broken up, rules relaxed. The few whocontinued well were allowed almost unlimited license; because themedical attendant insisted on the necessity of frequent exercise tokeep them in health: and had it been otherwise, no one had leisureto watch or restrain them. Miss Temple's whole attention wasabsorbed by the patients: she lived in the sick-room, never quittingit except to snatch a few hours' rest at night. The teachers werefully occupied with packing up and making other necessary preparationsfor the departure of those girls who were fortunate enough to havefriends and relations able and willing to remove them from the seat ofcontagion. Many, already smitten, went home only to die: some diedat the school, and were buried quietly and quickly, the nature ofthe malady forbidding delay.

　　While disease had thus become an inhabitant of Lowood, and deathits frequent visitor; while there was gloom and fear within its walls;while its rooms and passages steamed with hospital smells, the drugand the pastille striving vainly to overcome the effluvia ofmortality, that bright May shone unclouded over the bold hills andbeautiful woodland out of doors. Its garden, too, glowed with flowers:hollyhocks had sprung up tall as trees, lilies had opened, tulipsand roses were in bloom; the borders of the little beds were gaywith pink thrift and crimson double daisies; the sweetbriars gave out,morning and evening, their scent of spice and apples; and thesefragrant treasures were all useless for most of the inmates of Lowood,except to furnish now and then a handful of herbs and blossoms toput in a coffin.

　　But I, and the rest who continued well, enjoyed fully thebeauties of the scene and season; they let us ramble in the wood, likegipsies, from morning till night; we did what we liked, went wherewe liked: we lived better too. Mr. Brocklehurst and his family nevercame near Lowood now: household matters were not scrutinised into; thecross housekeeper was gone, driven away by the fear of infection;her successor, who had been matron at the Lowton Dispensary, unused tothe ways of her new abode, provided with comparative liberality.Besides, there were fewer to feed; the sick could eat little; ourbreakfast-basins were better filled; when there was no time to preparea regular dinner, which often happened, she would give us a largepiece of cold pie, or a thick slice of bread and cheese, and this wecarried away with us to the wood, where we each chose the spot weliked best, and dined sumptuously.

　　My favourite seat was a smooth and broad stone, rising white anddry from the very middle of the beck, and only to be got at bywading through the water; a feat I accomplished barefoot. The stonewas just broad enough to accommodate, comfortably, another girl andme, at that time my chosen comrade- one Mary Ann Wilson; a shrewd,observant personage, whose society I took pleasure in, partlybecause she was witty and original, and partly because she had amanner which set me at my ease. Some years older than I, she knew moreof the world, and could tell me many things I liked to hear: withher my curiosity found gratification: to my faults also she gave ampleindulgence, never imposing curb or rein on anything I said. She hada turn for narrative, I for analysis; she liked to inform, I toquestion; so we got on swimmingly together, deriving muchentertainment, if not much improvement, from our mutual intercourse.

　　And where, meantime, was Helen Burns? Why did I not spend thesesweet days of liberty with her? Had I forgotten her? or was I soworthless as to have grown tired of her pure society? Surely theMary Ann Wilson I have mentioned was inferior to my firstacquaintance: she could only tell me amusing stories, andreciprocate any racy and pungent gossip I chose to indulge in;while, if I have spoken truth of Helen, she was qualified to givethose who enjoyed the privilege of her converse a taste of farhigher things.

　　True, reader; and I knew and felt this: and though I am a defectivebeing, with many faults and few redeeming points, yet I never tired ofHelen Burns; nor ever ceased to cherish for her a sentiment ofattachment, as strong, tender, and respectful as any that everanimated my heart. How could it be otherwise, when Helen, at all timesand under all circumstances, evinced for me a quiet and faithfulfriendship, which ill-humour never soured, nor irritation nevertroubled? But Helen was ill at present: for some weeks she had beenremoved from my sight to I knew not what room upstairs. She was not, Iwas told, in the hospital portion of the house with the feverpatients; for her complaint was consumption, not typhus: and byconsumption I, in my ignorance, understood something mild, whichtime and care would be sure to alleviate.

　　I was confirmed in this idea by the fact of her once or twicecoming downstairs on very warm sunny afternoons, and being taken byMiss Temple into the garden; but, on these occasions, I was notallowed to go and speak to her; I only saw her from the schoolroomwindow, and then not distinctly; for she was much wrapped up, andsat at a distance under the verandah.

　　One evening, in the beginning of June, I had stayed out very latewith Mary Ann in the wood; we had, as usual, separated ourselvesfrom the others, and had wandered far; so far that we lost our way,and had to ask it at a lonely cottage, where a man and woman lived,who looked after a herd of half-wild swine that fed on the mast in thewood. When we got back, it was after moonrise: a pony, which we knewto be the surgeon's, was standing at the garden door. Mary Annremarked that she supposed some one must be very ill, as Mr. Bates hadbeen sent for at that time of the evening. She went into the house;I stayed behind a few minutes to plant in my garden a handful of rootsI had dug up in the forest, and which I feared would wither if Ileft them till the morning. This done, I lingered yet a little longer:the flowers smelt so sweet as the dew fell; it was such a pleasantevening, so serene, so warm; the still glowing west promised so fairlyanother fine day on the morrow; the moon rose with such majesty in thegrave east. I was noting these things and enjoying them as a childmight, when it entered my mind as it had never done before:-

　　'How sad to be lying now on a sick bed, and to be in danger ofdying! This world is pleasant- it would be dreary to be called fromit, and to have to go who knows where?'

　　And then my mind made its first earnest effort to comprehend whathad been infused into it concerning heaven and hell; and for the firsttime it recoiled, baffled; and for the first time glancing behind,on each side, and before it, it saw all round an unfathomed gulf: itfelt the one point where it stood- the present; all the rest wasformless cloud and vacant depth; and it shuddered at the thought oftottering, and plunging amid that chaos. While pondering this newidea, I heard the front door open; Mr. Bates came out, and with himwas a nurse. After she had seen him mount his horse and depart, shewas about to close the door, but I ran up to her.

　　'How is Helen Burns?'

　　'Very poorly,' was the answer.

　　'Is it her Mr. Bates has been to see?'

　　'Yes.'

　　'And what does he say about her?'

　　'He says she'll not be here long.'

　　This phrase, uttered in my hearing yesterday, would have onlyconveyed the notion that she was about to be removed toNorthumberland, to her own home. I should not have suspected that itmeant she was dying; but I knew instantly now! It opened clear on mycomprehension that Helen Burns was numbering her last days in thisworld, and that she was going to be taken to the region of spirits, ifsuch region there were. I experienced a shock of horror, then a strongthrill of grief, then a desire- a necessity to see her; and I asked inwhat room she lay.

　　'She is in Miss Temple's room,' said the nurse.

　　'May I go up and speak to her?'

　　'Oh no, child! It is not likely; and now it is time for you to comein; you'll catch the fever if you stop out when the dew is falling.'

　　The nurse closed the front door; I went in by the side entrancewhich led to the schoolroom: I was just in time; it was nineo'clock, and Miss Miller was calling the pupils to go to bed.

　　It might be two hours later, probably near eleven, when I- nothaving been able to fall asleep, and deeming, from the perfect silenceof the dormitory, that my companions were all wrapt in profoundrepose- rose softly, put on my frock over my night-dress, and, withoutshoes, crept from the apartment, and set off in quest of Miss Temple'sroom. It was quite at the other end of the house; but I knew my way;and the light of the unclouded summer moon, entering here and there atpassage windows, enabled me to find it without difficulty. An odour ofcamphor and burnt vinegar warned me when I came near the fever room:and I passed its door quickly, fearful lest the nurse who sat up allnight should hear me. I dreaded being discovered and sent back; forI must see Helen,- I must embrace her before she died,- I must giveher one last kiss, exchange with her one last word.

　　Having descended a staircase, traversed a portion of the housebelow, and succeeded in opening and shutting, without noise, twodoors, I reached another flight of steps; these I mounted, and thenjust opposite to me was Miss Temple's room. A light shone throughthe keyhole and from under the door; a profound stillness pervaded thevicinity. Coming near, I found the door slightly ajar; probably toadmit some fresh air into the close abode of sickness. Indisposed tohesitate, and full of impatient impulses- soul and senses quiveringwith keen throes- I put it back and looked in. My eye sought Helen,and feared to find death.

　　Close by Miss Temple's bed, and half covered with its whitecurtains, there stood a little crib. I saw the outline of a form underthe clothes, but the face was hid by the hangings: the nurse I hadspoken to in the garden sat in an easy-chair asleep; an unsnuffedcandle burnt dimly on the table. Miss Temple was not to be seen: Iknew afterwards that she had been called to a delirious patient in thefever-room. I advanced; then paused by the crib side: my hand was onthe curtain, but I preferred speaking before I withdrew it. I stillrecoiled at the dread of seeing a corpse.

　　'Helen!' I whispered softly, 'are you awake?'

　　She stirred herself, put back the curtain, and I saw her face,pale, wasted, but quite composed: she looked so little changed that myfear was instantly dissipated.

　　'Can it be you, Jane?' she asked, in her own gentle voice.

　　'Oh!' I thought, 'she is not going to die; they are mistaken: shecould not speak and look so calmly if she were.'

　　I got on to her crib and kissed her: her forehead was cold, and hercheek both cold and thin, and so were her hand and wrist; but shesmiled as of old.

　　'Why are you come here, Jane? It is past eleven o'clock: I heard itstrike some minutes since.'

　　'I came to see you, Helen: I heard you were very ill, and I couldnot sleep till I had spoken to you.'

　　'You came to bid me good-bye, then: you are just in time probably.'

　　'Are you going somewhere, Helen? Are you going home?'

　　'Yes; to my long home- my last home.'

　　'No, no, Helen!' I stopped, distressed. While I tried to devourmy tears, a fit of coughing seized Helen; it did not, however, wakethe nurse; when it was over, she lay some minutes exhausted; thenshe whispered-

　　'Jane, your little feet are bare; lie down and cover yourselfwith my quilt.'

　　I did so: she put her arm over me, and I nestled close to her.After a long silence, she resumed, still whispering-

　　'I am very happy, Jane; and when you hear that I am dead, youmust be sure and not grieve: there is nothing to grieve about. Weall must die one day, and the illness which is removing me is notpainful; it is gentle and gradual: my mind is at rest. I leave noone to regret me much: I have only a father; and he is lately married,and will not miss me. By dying young, I shall escape great sufferings.I had not qualities or talents to make my way very well in theworld: I should have been continually at fault.'

　　'But where are you going to, Helen? Can you see? Do you know?'

　　'I believe; I have faith: I am going to God.'

　　'Where is God? What is God?'

　　'My Maker and yours, who will never destroy what He created. I relyimplicitly on His power, and confide wholly in His goodness: I countthe hours till that eventful one arrives which shall restore me toHim, reveal Him to me.'

　　'You are sure, then, Helen, that there is such a place as heaven,and that our souls can get to it when we die?'

　　'I am sure there is a future state; I believe God is good; I canresign my immortal part to Him without any misgiving. God is myfather; God is my friend: I love Him; I believe He loves me.'

　　'And shall I see you again, Helen, when I die?'

　　'You will come to the same region of happiness: be received bythe same mighty, universal Parent, no doubt, dear Jane.'

　　Again I questioned, but this time only in thought. 'Where is thatregion? Does it exist?' And I clasped my arms closer around Helen; sheseemed dearer to me than ever; I felt as if I could not let her go;I lay with my face hidden on her neck. Presently she said, in thesweetest tone-

　　'How comfortable I am! That last fit of coughing has tired me alittle; I feel as if I could sleep: but don't leave me, Jane; I liketo have you near me.'

　　'I'll stay with you, dear Helen: no one shall take me away.'

　　'Are you warm, darling?'

　　'Yes.'

　　'Good-night, Jane.'

　　'Good-night, Helen.'

　　She kissed me, and I her, and we both soon slumbered.

　　When I awoke it was day: an unusual movement roused me; I lookedup; I was in somebody's arms; the nurse held me; she was carrying methrough the passage back to the dormitory. I was not reprimanded forleaving my bed; people had something else to think about; noexplanation was afforded then to my many questions; but a day or twoafterwards I learned that Miss Temple, on returning to her own room atdawn, had found me laid in the little crib; my face against HelenBurns's shoulder, my arms round her neck. I was asleep, and Helen was-dead.

　　Her grave is in Brocklebridge churchyard: for fifteen years afterher death it was only covered by a grassy mound; but now a grey marbletablet marks the spot, inscribed with her name, and the word'Resurgam.'

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER X--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　HITHERTO I have recorded in detail the events of my insignificantexistence: to the first ten years of my life I have given almost asmany chapters. But this is not to be a regular autobiography: I amonly bound to invoke Memory where I know her responses will possesssome degree of interest; therefore I now pass a space of eight yearsalmost in silence: a few lines only are necessary to keep up the linksof connection.

　　When the typhus fever had fulfilled its mission of devastation atLowood, it gradually disappeared from thence; but not till itsvirulence and the number of its victims had drawn public attentionon the school. Inquiry was made into the origin of the scourge, and bydegrees various facts came out which excited public indignation in ahigh degree. The unhealthy nature of the site; the quantity andquality of the children's food; the brackish, fetid water used inits preparation; the pupils' wretched clothing and accommodations- allthese things were discovered, and the discovery produced a resultmortifying to Mr. Brocklehurst, but beneficial to the institution.

　　Several wealthy and benevolent individuals in the county subscribedlargely for the erection of a more convenient building in a bettersituation; new regulations were made; improvements in diet andclothing introduced; the funds of the school were intrusted to themanagement of a committee. Mr. Brocklehurst, who, from his wealthand family connections, could not be overlooked, still retained thepost of treasurer; but he was aided in the discharge of his dutiesby gentlemen of rather more enlarged and sympathising minds: hisoffice of inspector, too, was shared by those who knew how tocombine reason with strictness, comfort with economy, compassionwith uprightness. The school, thus improved, became in time a trulyuseful and noble institution. I remained an inmate of its walls, afterits regeneration, for eight years: six as pupil, and two as teacher;and in both capacities I bear my testimony to its value andimportance.

　　During these eight years my life was uniform: but not unhappy,because it was not inactive. I had the means of an excellent educationplaced within my reach; a fondness for some of my studies, and adesire to excel in all, together with a great delight in pleasing myteachers, especially such as I loved, urged me on: I availed myselffully of the advantages offered me. In time I rose to be the firstgirl of the first class; then I was invested with the office ofteacher; which I discharged with zeal for two years: but at the end ofthat time I altered.

　　Miss Temple, through all changes, had thus far continuedsuperintendent of the seminary: to her instruction I owed the bestpart of my acquirements; her friendship and society had been mycontinual solace; she had stood me in the stead of mother,governess, and, latterly, companion. At this period she married,removed with her husband (a clergyman, an excellent man, almost worthyof such a wife) to a distant county, and consequently was lost to me.

　　From the day she left I was no longer the same: with her was goneevery settled feeling, every association that had made Lowood insome degree a home to me. I had imbibed from her something of hernature and much of her habits: more harmonious thoughts: what seemedbetter regulated feelings had become the inmates of my mind. I hadgiven in allegiance to duty and order; I was quiet; I believed I wascontent: to the eyes of others, usually even to my own, I appeared adisciplined and subdued character.

　　But destiny, in the shape of the Rev. Mr. Nasmyth, came betweenme and Miss Temple: I saw her in her travelling dress step into apost-chaise, shortly after the marriage ceremony; I watched the chaisemount the hill and disappear beyond its brow; and then retired to myown room, and there spent in solitude the greatest part of thehalf-holiday granted in honour of the occasion.

　　I walked about the chamber most of the time. I imagined myself onlyto be regretting my loss, and thinking how to repair it; but when myreflections were concluded, and I looked up and found that theafternoon was gone, and evening far advanced, another discovery dawnedon me, namely, that in the interval I had undergone a transformingprocess; that my mind had put off all it had borrowed of MissTemple- or rather that she had taken with her the serene atmosphereI had been breathing in her vicinity- and that now I was left in mynatural element, and beginning to feel the stirring of old emotions.It did not seem as if a prop were withdrawn, but rather as if a motivewere gone: it was not the power to be tranquil which had failed me,but the reason for tranquillity was no more. My world had for someyears been in Lowood: my experience had been of its rules and systems;now I remembered that the real world was wide, and that a varied fieldof hopes and fears, of sensations and excitements, awaited those whohad courage to go forth into its expanse, to seek real knowledge oflife amidst its perils.

　　I went to my window, opened it, and looked out. There were thetwo wings of the building; there was the garden; there were the skirtsof Lowood; there was the hilly horizon. My eye passed all otherobjects to rest on those most remote, the blue peaks; it was those Ilonged to surmount; all within their boundary of rock and heath seemedprison-ground, exile limits. I traced the white road winding round thebase of one mountain, and vanishing in a gorge between two; how Ilonged to follow it farther! I recalled the time when I hadtravelled that very road in a coach; I remembered descending that hillat twilight; an age seemed to have elapsed since the day which broughtme first to Lowood, and I had never quitted it since. My vacations hadall been spent at school: Mrs. Reed had never sent for me toGateshead; neither she nor any of her family had ever been to visitme. I had had no communication by letter or message with the outerworld: school-rules, school-duties, school-habits and notions, andvoices, and faces, and phrases, and costumes, and preferences, andantipathies- such was what I knew of existence. And now I felt that itwas not enough; I tired of the routine of eight years in oneafternoon. I desired liberty; for liberty I gasped; for liberty Iuttered a prayer; it seemed scattered on the wind then faintlyblowing. I abandoned it and framed a humbler supplication; for change,stimulus: that petition, too, seemed swept off into vague space:'Then,' I cried, half desperate, 'grant me at least a new servitude!'

　　Here a bell, ringing the hour of supper, called me downstairs.

　　I was not free to resume the interrupted chain of my reflectionstill bedtime: even then a teacher who occupied the same room with mekept me from the subject to which I longed to recur, by a prolongedeffusion of small talk. How I wished sleep would silence her. Itseemed as if, could I but go back to the idea which had last enteredmy mind as I stood at the window, some inventive suggestion would risefor my relief.

　　Miss Gryce snored at last; she was a heavy Welsh-woman, and tillnow her habitual nasal strains had never been regarded by me in anyother light than as a nuisance; to-night I hailed the first deep noteswith satisfaction; I was debarrassed of interruption; myhalf-effaced thought instantly revived.

　　'A new servitude! There is something in that,' I soliloquised(mentally, be it understood; I did not talk aloud). 'I know thereis, because it does not sound too sweet; it is not like such wordsas Liberty, Excitement, Enjoyment: delightful sounds truly; but nomore than sounds for me; and so hollow and fleeting that it is merewaste of time to listen to them. But Servitude! That must be matter offact. Any one may serve: I have served here eight years; now all Iwant is to serve elsewhere. Can I not get so much of my own will? Isnot the thing feasible? Yes- yes- the end is not so difficult; if Ihad only a brain active enough to ferret out the means of attainingit.'

　　I sat up in bed by way of arousing this said brain: it was a chillynight; I covered my shoulders with a shawl, and then I proceeded tothink again with all my might.

　　'What do I want? A new place, in a new house, amongst new faces,under new circumstances: I want this because it is of no use wantinganything better. How do people do to get a new place? They apply tofriends, I suppose: I have no friends. There are many others whohave no friends, who must look about for themselves and be their ownhelpers; and what is their resource?'

　　I could not tell: nothing answered me; I then ordered my brain tofind a response, and quickly. It worked and worked faster: I feltthe pulses throb in my head and temples; but for nearly an hour itworked in chaos; and no result came of its efforts. Feverish with vainlabour, I got up and took a turn in the room; undrew the curtain,noted a star or two, shivered with cold, and again crept to bed.

　　A kind fairy, in my absence, had surely dropped the requiredsuggestion on my pillow; for as I lay down, it came quietly andnaturally to my mind:- 'Those who want situations advertise; you
