　　'Adele showed me some sketches this morning, which she said wereyours. I don't know whether they were entirely of your doing; probablya master aided you?'

　　'No, indeed!' I interjected.

　　'Ah! that pricks pride. Well, fetch me your portfolio, if you canvouch for its contents being original; but don't pass your word unlessyou are certain: I can recognise patchwork.'

　　'Then I will say nothing, and you shall judge for yourself, sir.'

　　I brought the portfolio from the library.

　　'Approach the table,' said he; and I wheeled it to his couch. Adeleand Mrs. Fairfax drew near to see the pictures.

　　'No crowding,' said Mr. Rochester: 'take the drawings from myhand as I finish with them; but don't push your faces up to mine.'

　　He deliberately scrutinised each sketch and painting. Three he laidaside; the others, when he had examined them, he swept from him.

　　'Take them off to the other table, Mrs. Fairfax,' said he, 'andlook at them with Adele;- you' (glancing at me) 'resume your seat, andanswer my questions. I perceive those pictures were done by onehand: was that hand yours?'

　　'Yes.'

　　'And when did you find time to do them? They have taken muchtime, and some thought.'

　　'I did them in the last two vacations I spent at Lowood, when I hadno other occupation.'

　　'Where did you get your copies?'

　　'Out of my head.'

　　'That head I see now on your shoulders?'

　　'Yes, sir.'

　　'Has it other furniture of the same kind within?'

　　'I should think it may have: I should hope- better.'

　　He spread the pictures before him, and again surveyed themalternately.

　　While he is so occupied, I will tell you, reader, what they are:and first, I must premise that they are nothing wonderful. Thesubjects had, indeed, risen vividly on my mind. As I saw them with thespiritual eye, before I attempted to embody them, they werestriking; but my hand would not second my fancy, and in each case ithad wrought out but a pale portrait of the thing I had conceived.

　　These pictures were in water-colours. The first representedclouds low and livid, rolling over a swollen sea: all the distance wasin eclipse; so, too, was the foreground; or rather, the nearestbillows, for there was no land. One gleam of light lifted intorelief a half-submerged mast, on which sat a cormorant, dark andlarge, with wings flecked with foam; its beak held a gold bracelet setwith gems, that I had touched with as brilliant tints as my palettecould yield, and as glittering distinctness as my pencil could impart.Sinking below the bird and mast, a drowned corpse glanced throughthe green water; a fair arm was the only limb clearly visible,whence the bracelet had been washed or torn.

　　The second picture contained for foreground only the dim peak ofa hill, with grass and some leaves slanting as if by a breeze.Beyond and above spread an expanse of sky, dark blue as at twilight:rising into the sky was a woman's shape to the bust, portrayed intints as dusk and soft as I could combine. The dim forehead wascrowned with a star; the lineaments below were seen as through thesuffusion of vapour; the eyes shone dark and wild; the hair streamedshadowy, like a beamless cloud torn by storm or by electric travail.On the neck lay a pale reflection like moonlight; the same faintlustre touched the train of thin clouds from which rose and bowed thisvision of the Evening Star.

　　The third showed the pinnacle of an iceberg piercing a polar wintersky: a muster of northern lights reared their dim lances, closeserried, along the horizon. Throwing these into distance, rose, in theforeground, a head,- a colossal head, inclined towards the iceberg,and resting against it. Two thin hands, joined under the forehead, andsupporting it, drew up before the lower features a sable veil; abrow quite bloodless, white as bone, and an eye hollow and fixed,blank of meaning but for the glassiness of despair, alone werevisible. Above the temples, amidst wreathed turban folds of blackdrapery, vague in its character and consistency as cloud, gleamed aring of white flame, gemmed with sparkles of a more lurid tinge.This pale crescent was 'the likeness of a kingly crown'; what itdiademed was 'the shape which shape had none.'

　　'Were you happy when you painted these pictures?' asked Mr.Rochester presently.

　　'I was absorbed, sir: yes, and I was happy. To paint them, inshort, was to enjoy one of the keenest pleasures I have ever known.'

　　'That is not saying much. Your pleasures, by your own account, havebeen few; but I daresay you did exist in a kind of artist'sdreamland while you blent and arranged these strange tints. Did yousit at them long each day?'

　　'I had nothing else to do, because it was the vacation, and I satat them from morning till noon, and from noon till night: the lengthof the midsummer days favoured my inclination to apply.'

　　'And you felt self-satisfied with the result of your ardentlabours?'

　　'Far from it. I was tormented by the contrast between my idea andmy handiwork: in each case I had imagined something which I wasquite powerless to realise.'

　　'Not quite: you have secured the shadow of your thought; but nomore, probably. You had not enough of the artist's skill and scienceto give it full being: yet the drawings are, for a school-girl,peculiar. As to the thoughts, they are elfish. These eyes in theEvening Star you must have seen in a dream. How could you make themlook so clear, and yet not at all brilliant? for the planet abovequells their rays. And what meaning is that in their solemn depth? Andwho taught you to paint wind? There is a high gale in that sky, and onthis hill-top. Where did you see Latmos? For that is Latmos. There!put the drawings away!'

　　I had scarce tied the strings of the portfolio, when, looking athis watch, he said abruptly-

　　'It is nine o'clock: what are you about, Miss Eyre, to let Adelesit up so long? Take her to bed!'

　　Adele went to kiss him before quitting the room: he endured thecaress, but scarcely seemed to relish it more than Pilot would havedone, nor so much.

　　'I wish you all good-night, now,' said he, making a movement of thehand towards the door, in token that he was tired of our company,and wished to dismiss us. Mrs. Fairfax folded up her knitting: Itook my portfolio: we curtseyed to him, received a frigid bow inreturn, and so withdrew.

　　'You said Mr. Rochester was not strikingly peculiar, Mrs. Fairfax,'I observed, when I rejoined her in her room, after putting Adele tobed.

　　'Well, is he?'

　　'I think so: he is very changeful and abrupt.'

　　'True: no doubt he may appear so to a stranger, but I am soaccustomed to his manner, I never think of it; and then, if he haspeculiarities of temper, allowance should be made.'

　　'Why?'

　　'Partly because it is his nature- and we can none of us help ournature; and partly because he has painful thoughts, no doubt, toharass him, and make his spirits unequal.'

　　'What about?'

　　'Family troubles, for one thing.'

　　'But he has no family.'

　　'Not now, but he has had- or, at least, relatives. He lost hiselder brother a few years since.'

　　'His elder brother?'

　　'Yes. The present Mr. Rochester has not been very long inpossession of the property; only about nine years.'

　　'Nine years is a tolerable time. Was he so very fond of his brotheras to be still inconsolable for his loss?'

　
　　　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jane Eyre - Charlotte Bronte　　

　　CHAPTER I

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　THERE was no possibility of taking a walk that day. We had beenwandering, indeed, in the leafless shrubbery an hour in the morning;but since dinner (Mrs. Reed, when there was no company, dined early)the cold winter wind had brought with it clouds so sombre, and arain so penetrating, that further outdoor exercise was now out ofthe question.

　　I was glad of it: I never liked long walks, especially on chillyafternoons: dreadful to me was the coming home in the raw twilight,with nipped fingers and toes, and a heart saddened by the chidingsof Bessie, the nurse, and humbled by the consciousness of myphysical inferiority to Eliza, John, and Georgiana Reed.

　　The said Eliza, John, and Georgiana were now clustered roundtheir mama in the drawing-room: she lay reclined on a sofa by thefireside, and with her darlings about her (for the time neitherquarrelling nor crying) looked perfectly happy. Me, she haddispensed from joining the group; saying, 'She regretted to be underthe necessity of keeping me at a distance; but that until she heardfrom Bessie, and could discover by her own observation, that I wasendeavouring in good earnest to acquire a more sociable andchildlike disposition, a more attractive and sprightly manner-something lighter, franker, more natural, as it were- she reallymust exclude me from privileges intended only for contented, happy,little children.'

　　'What does Bessie say I have done?' I asked.

　　'Jane, I don't like cavillers or questioners; besides, there issomething truly forbidding in a child taking up her elders in thatmanner. Be seated somewhere; and until you can speak pleasantly,remain silent.'

　　A small breakfast-room adjoined the drawing-room, I slipped inthere. It contained a bookcase: I soon possessed myself of a volume,taking care that it should be one stored with pictures. I mounted intothe window-seat: gathering up my feet, I sat cross-legged, like aTurk; and, having drawn the red moreen curtain nearly close, I wasshrined in double retirement.

　　Folds of scarlet drapery shut in my view to the right hand; tothe left were the clear panes of glass, protecting, but not separatingme from the drear November day. At intervals, while turning over theleaves of my book, I studied the aspect of that winter afternoon.Afar, it offered a pale blank of mist and cloud; near a scene of wetlawn and storm-beat shrub, with ceaseless rain sweeping away wildlybefore a long and lamentable blast.

　　I returned to my book- Bewick's History of British Birds: theletterpress thereof I cared little for, generally speaking; and yetthere were certain introductory pages that, child as I was, I couldnot pass quite as a blank. They were those which treat of the hauntsof sea-fowl; of 'the solitary rocks and promontories' by them onlyinhabited; of the coast of Norway, studded with isles from itssouthern extremity, the Lindeness, or Naze, to the North Cape-

　　'Where the Northern Ocean, in vast whirls,

　　Boils round the naked, melancholy isles

　　Of farthest Thule; and the Atlantic surge

　　Pours in among the stormy Hebrides.'

　　Nor could I pass unnoticed the suggestion of the bleak shores ofLapland, Siberia, Spitzbergen, Nova Zembla, Iceland, Greenland, with'the vast sweep of the Arctic Zone, and those forlorn regions ofdreary space,- that reservoir of frost and snow, where firm fieldsof ice, the accumulation of centuries of winters, glazed in Alpineheights above heights, surround the pole and concentre themultiplied rigours of extreme cold.' Of these death-white realms Iformed an idea of my own: shadowy, like all the half-comprehendednotions that float dim through children's brains, but strangelyimpressive. The words in these introductory pages connected themselveswith the succeeding vignettes, and gave significance to the rockstanding up alone in a sea of billow and spray; to the broken boatstranded on a desolate coast; to the cold and ghastly moon glancingthrough bars of cloud at a wreck just sinking.

　　I cannot tell what sentiment haunted the quite solitary churchyard,with its inscribed headstone; its gate, its two trees, its lowhorizon, girdled by a broken wall, and its newly-risen crescent,attesting the hour of eventide.

　　The two ships becalmed on a torpid sea, I believed to be marinephantoms.

　　The fiend pinning down the thief's pack behind him, I passed overquickly: it was an object of terror.

　　So was the black horned thing seated aloof on a rock, surveying adistant crowd surrounding a gallows.

　　Each picture told a story; mysterious often to my undevelopedunderstanding and imperfect feelings, yet ever profoundly interesting:as interesting as the tales Bessie sometimes narrated on winterevenings, when she chanced to be in good humour; and when, havingbrought her ironing-table to the nursery hearth, she allowed us to sitabout it, and while she got up Mrs. Reed's lace frills, and crimpedher nightcap borders, fed our eager attention with passages of loveand adventure taken from old fairy tales and other ballads; or (asat a later period I discovered) from the pages of Pamela, and Henry,Earl of Moreland.

　　With Bewick on my knee, I was then happy: happy at least in my way.I feared nothing but interruption, and that came too soon. Thebreakfast-room door opened.

　　'Boh! Madam Mope!' cried the voice of John Reed; then he paused: hefound the room apparently empty.

　　'Where the dickens is she!' he continued. 'Lizzy! Georgy!(calling to his sisters) Joan is not here: tell mama she is run outinto the rain- bad animal!'

　　'It is well I drew the curtain,' thought I; and I wishedfervently he might not discover my hiding-place: nor would John Reedhave found it out himself; he was not quick either of vision orconception; but Eliza just put her head in at the door, and said atonce-

　　'She is in the window-seat, to be sure, Jack.'

　　And I came out immediately, for I trembled at the idea of beingdragged forth by the said Jack.

　　'What do you want?' I asked, with awkward diffidence.

　　'Say, "What do you want, Master Reed?"' was the answer. 'I want youto come here;' and seating himself in an armchair, he intimated by agesture that I was to approach and stand before him.

　　John Reed was a schoolboy of fourteen years old; four years olderthan I, for I was but ten: large and stout for his age, with a dingyand unwholesome skin; thick lineaments in a spacious visage, heavylimbs and large extremities. He gorged himself habitually at table,which made him bilious, and gave him a dim and bleared eye andflabby cheeks. He ought now to have been at school; but his mama hadtaken him home for a month or two, 'on account of his delicatehealth.' Mr. Miles, the master, affirmed that he would do very well ifhe had fewer cakes and sweetmeats sent him from home; but the mother'sheart turned from an opinion so harsh, and inclined rather to the morerefined idea that John's sallowness was owing to over-application and,perhaps, to pining after home.

　　John had not much affection for his mother and sisters, and anantipathy to me. He bullied and punished me; not two or three times inthe week, nor once or twice in the day, but continually: every nerve Ihad feared him, and every morsel of flesh in my bones shrank when hecame near. There were moments when I was bewildered by the terror heinspired, because I had no appeal whatever against either hismenaces or his inflictions; the servants did not like to offendtheir young master by taking my part against him, and Mrs. Reed wasblind and deaf on the subject: she never saw him strike or heard himabuse me, though he did both now and then in her very presence, morefrequently, however, behind her back.

　　Habitually obedient to John, I came up to his chair: he spentsome three minutes in thrusting out his tongue at me as far as hecould without damaging the roots: I knew he would soon strike, andwhile dreading the blow, I mused on the disgusting and ugly appearanceof him who would presently deal it. I wonder if he read that notion inmy face; for, all at once, without speaking, he struck suddenly andstrongly. I tottered, and on regaining my equilibrium retired back astep or two from his chair.

　　'That is for your impudence in answering mama awhile since,' saidhe, 'and for your sneaking way of getting behind curtains, and for thelook you had in your eyes two minutes since, you rat!'

　　Accustomed to John Reed's abuse, I never had an idea of replying toit; my care was how to endure the blow which would certainly followthe insult.

　　'What were you doing behind the curtain?' he asked.

　　'I was reading.'

　　'Show the book.'

　　I returned to the window and fetched it thence.

　　'You have no business to take our books; you are a dependant,mama says; you have no money; your father left you none; you oughtto beg, and not to live here with gentlemen's children like us, andeat the same meals we do, and wear clothes at our mama's expense. Now,I'll teach you to rummage my bookshelves: for they are mine; all thehouse belongs to me, or will do in a few years. Go and stand by thedoor, out of the way of the mirror and the windows.'

　　I did so, not at first aware what was his intention; but when I sawhim lift and poise the book and stand in act to hurl it, Iinstinctively started aside with a cry of alarm: not soon enough,however; the volume was flung, it hit me, and I fell, striking my headagainst the door and cutting it. The cut bled, the pain was sharp:my terror had passed its climax; other feelings succeeded.

　　'Wicked and cruel boy!' I said. 'You are like a murderer- you arelike a slave-driver- you are like the Roman emperors!'

　　I had read Goldsmith's History of Rome, and had formed my opinionof Nero, Caligula, etc. Also I had drawn parallels in silence, which Inever thought thus to have declared aloud.

　　'What! what!' he cried. 'Did she say that to me? Did you hearher, Eliza and Georgiana? Won't I tell mama? but first-'

　　He ran headlong at me: I felt him grasp my hair and my shoulder: hehad closed with a desperate thing. I really saw in him a tyrant, amurderer. I felt a drop or two of blood from my head trickle down myneck, and was sensible of somewhat pungent suffering: these sensationsfor the time predominated over fear, and I received him in franticsort. I don't very well know what I did with my hands, but he calledme 'Rat! Rat!' and bellowed out aloud. Aid was near him: Eliza andGeorgiana had run for Mrs. Reed, who was gone upstairs: she now cameupon the scene, followed by Bessie and her maid Abbot. We were parted:I heard the words-

　　'Dear! dear! What a fury to fly at Master John!'

　　'Did ever anybody see such a picture of passion!'

　　Then Mrs. Reed subjoined-

　　'Take her away to the red-room, and lock her in there.' Fourhands were immediately laid upon me, and I was borne upstairs.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER II--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　I RESISTED all the way: a new thing for me, and a circumstancewhich greatly strengthened the bad opinion Bessie and Miss Abbotwere disposed to entertain of me. The fact is, I was a trifle besidemyself; or rather out of myself, as the French would say: I wasconscious that a moment's mutiny had already rendered me liable tostrange penalties, and, like any other rebel slave, I felt resolved,in my desperation, to go all lengths.
