　　What was the matter? I had heard no order given: I was puzzled. EreI had gathered my wits, the classes were again seated: but as all eyeswere now turned to one point, mine followed the general direction, andencountered the personage who had received me last night. She stood atthe bottom of the long room, on the hearth; for there was a fire ateach end; she surveyed the two rows of girls silently and gravely.Miss Miller, approaching, seemed to ask her a question, and havingreceived her answer, went back to her place, and said aloud-

　　'Monitor of the first class, fetch the globes!'

　　While the direction was being executed, the lady consulted movedslowly up the room. I suppose I have a considerable organ ofveneration, for I retain yet the sense of admiring awe with which myeyes traced her steps. Seen now, in broad day-light, she lookedtall, fair, and shapely; brown eyes with a benignant light in theiririds, and a fine pencilling of long lashes round, relieved thewhiteness of her large front; on each of her temples her hair, of avery dark brown, was clustered in round curls, according to thefashion of those times, when neither smooth bands nor long ringletswere in vogue; her dress, also in the mode of the day, was of purplecloth, relieved by a sort of Spanish trimming of black velvet; agold watch (watches were not so common then as now) shone at hergirdle. Let the reader add, to complete the picture, refined features;a complexion, if pale, clear; and a stately air and carriage, and hewill have, at least, as clearly as words can give it, a correct ideaof the exterior of Miss Temple- Maria Temple, as I afterwards sawthe name written in a prayer-book intrusted to me to carry to church.

　　The superintendent of Lowood (for such was this lady) havingtaken her seat before a pair of globes placed on one of the tables,summoned the first class round her, and commenced giving a lesson ongeography; the lower classes were called by the teachers:repetitions in history, grammar, etc., went on for an hour; writingand arithmetic succeeded, and music lessons were given by MissTemple to some of the elder girls. The duration of each lesson wasmeasured by the clock, which at last struck twelve. The superintendentrose-

　　'I have a word to address to the pupils,' said she.

　　The tumult of cessation from lessons was already breaking forth,but it sank at her voice. She went on-

　　'You had this morning a breakfast which you could not eat; you mustbe hungry:- I have ordered that a lunch of bread and cheese shall beserved to all.'

　　The teachers looked at her with a sort of surprise.

　　'It is to be done on my responsibility,' she added, in anexplanatory tone to them, and immediately afterwards left the room.

　　The bread and cheese was presently brought in and distributed, tothe high delight and refreshment of the whole school. The order wasnow given 'To the garden!' Each put on a coarse straw bonnet, withstrings of coloured calico, and a cloak of grey frieze, I wassimilarly equipped, and, following the stream, I made my way intothe open air.

　　The garden was a wide enclosure, surrounded with walls so high asto exclude every glimpse of prospect; a covered verandah ran downone side, and broad walks bordered a middle space divided intoscores of little beds: these beds were assigned as gardens for thepupils to cultivate, and each bed had an owner. When full of flowersthey would doubtless look pretty; but now, at the latter end ofJanuary, all was wintry blight and brown decay. I shuddered as I stoodand looked round me: it was an inclement day for outdoor exercise; notpositively rainy, but darkened by a drizzling yellow fog; all underfoot was still soaking wet with the floods of yesterday. Thestronger among the girls ran about and engaged in active games, butsundry pale and thin ones herded together for shelter and warmth inthe verandah; and amongst these, as the dense mist penetrated to theirshivering frames, I heard frequently the sound of a hollow cough.

　　As yet I had spoken to no one, nor did anybody seem to takenotice of me; I stood lonely enough: but to that feeling ofisolation I was accustomed; it did not oppress me much. I leantagainst a pillar of the verandah, drew my grey mantle close aboutme, and, trying to forget the cold which nipped me without, and theunsatisfied hunger which gnawed me within, delivered myself up tothe employment of watching and thinking. My reflections were tooundefined and fragmentary to merit record: I hardly yet knew where Iwas; Gateshead and my past life seemed floated away to an immeasurabledistance; the present was vague and strange, and of the future I couldform no conjecture. I looked round the convent-like garden, and thenup at the house- a large building, half of which seemed grey andold, the other half quite new. The new part, containing the schoolroomand dormitory, was lit by mullioned and latticed windows, which gaveit a church-like aspect; a stone tablet over the door bore thisinscription-Brocklehurst, of Brocklehurst Hall, in this county.' 'Let your lightso shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorifyyour Father which is in heaven.'- St. Matt. v. 16.

　　I read these words over and over again: I felt that anexplanation belonged to them, and was unable fully to penetratetheir import. I was still pondering the signification of'Institution', and endeavouring to make out a connection between thefirst words and the verse of Scripture, when the sound of a coughclose behind me made me turn my head. I saw a girl sitting on astone bench near; she was bent over a book, on the perusal of whichshe seemed intent: from where I stood I could see the title- it wasRasselas; a name that struck me as strange, and consequentlyattractive. In turning a leaf she happened to look up, and I said toher directly-

　　'Is your book interesting?' I had already formed the intention ofasking her to lend it to me some day.

　　'I like it,' she answered, after a pause of a second or two, duringwhich she examined me.

　　'What is it about?' I continued. I hardly know where I found thehardihood thus to open a conversation with a stranger; the step wascontrary to my nature and habits: but I think her occupation touched achord of sympathy somewhere; for I too liked reading, though of afrivolous and childish kind; I could not digest or comprehend theserious or substantial.

　　'You may look at it,' replied the girl, offering me the book.

　　I did so; a brief examination convinced me that the contents wereless taking than the title: Rasselas looked dull to my trifling taste;I saw nothing about fairies, nothing about genii; no bright varietyseemed spread over the closely-printed pages. I returned it to her;she received it quietly, and without saying anything she was aboutto relapse into her former studious mood: again I ventured todisturb her-

　　'Can you tell me what the writing on that stone over the doormeans? What is Lowood Institution?'

　　'This house where you are come to live.'

　　'And why do they call it Institution? Is it in any way differentfrom other schools?'

　　'It is partly a charity-school: you and I, and all the rest ofus, are charity-children. I suppose you are an orphan: are noteither your father or your mother dead?'

　　'Both died before I can remember.'

　　'Well, all the girls here have lost either one or both parents, andthis is called an institution for educating orphans.'

　　'Do we pay no money? Do they keep us for nothing?'

　　'We pay, or our friends pay, fifteen pounds a year for each.'

　　'Then why do they call us charity-children?'

　　'Because fifteen pounds is not enough for board and teaching, andthe deficiency is supplied by subscription.'

　　'Who subscribes?'

　　'Different benevolent-minded ladies and gentlemen in thisneighbourhood and in London.'

　　'Who was Naomi Brocklehurst?'

　　'The lady who built the new part of this house as that tabletrecords, and whose son overlooks and directs everything here.'

　　'Why?'

　　'Because he is treasurer and manager of the establishment.'

　　'Then this house does not belong to that tall lady who wears awatch, and who said we were to have some bread and cheese?'

　　'To Miss Temple? Oh, no! I wish it did: she has to answer to Mr.Brocklehurst for all she does. Mr. Brocklehurst buys all our foodand all our clothes.'

　　'Does he live here?'

　　'No- two miles off, at a large hall.'

　　'Is he a good man?'

　　'He is a clergyman, and is said to do a great deal of good.'

　　'Did you say that tall lady was called Miss Temple?'

　　'Yes.'

　　'And what are the other teachers called?'

　　'The one with red cheeks is called Miss Smith; she attends to thework, and cuts out- for we make our own clothes, our frocks, andpelisses, and everything; the little one with black hair is MissScatcherd; she teaches history and grammar, and hears the second classrepetitions; and the one who wears a shawl, and has apocket-handkerchief tied to her side with a yellow ribband, isMadame Pierrot: she comes from Lisle, in France, and teaches French.'

　　'Do you like the teachers?'

　　'Well enough.'

　　'Do you like the little black one, and the Madame-? -I cannotpronounce her name as you do.'

　　'Miss Scatcherd is hasty- you must take care not to offend her;Madame Pierrot is not a bad sort of person.'

　　'But Miss Temple is the best- isn't she?'

　　'Miss Temple is very good and very clever; she is above the rest,because she knows far more than they do.'

　　'Have you been long here?'

　　'Two years.'

　　'Are you an orphan?'

　　'My mother is dead.'

　　'Are you happy here?'

　　'You ask rather too many questions. I have given you answers enoughfor the present: now I want to read.'

　　But at that moment the summons sounded for dinner; all re-enteredthe house. The odour which now filled the refectory was scarcelymore appetising than that which had regaled our nostrils at breakfast:the dinner was served in two huge tin-plated vessels, whence rose astrong steam redolent of rancid fat. I found the mess to consist ofindifferent potatoes and strange shreds of rusty meat, mixed andcooked together. Of this preparation a tolerably abundant plateful wasapportioned to each pupil. I ate what I could, and wondered withinmyself whether every day's fare would be like this.

　　After dinner, we immediately adjourned to the schoolroom: lessonsrecommenced, and were continued till five o'clock.

　　The only marked event of the afternoon was, that I saw the girlwith whom I had conversed in the verandah dismissed in disgrace byMiss Scatcherd from a history class, and sent to stand in the middleof the large schoolroom. The punishment seemed to me in a highdegree ignominious, especially for so great a girl- she lookedthirteen or upwards. I expected she would show signs of great distressand shame; but to my surprise she neither wept nor blushed:composed, though grave, she stood, the central mark of all eyes.'How can she bear it so quietly- so firmly?' I asked of myself.'Were I in her place, it seems to me I should wish the earth to openand swallow me up. She looks as if she were thinking of somethingbeyond her punishment- beyond her situation: of something not roundher nor before her. I have heard of day-dreams- is she in aday-dream now? Her eyes are fixed on the floor, but I am sure theydo not see it- her sight seems turned in, gone down into her heart:she is looking at what she can remember, I believe; not at what isreally present. I wonder what sort of a girl she is- whether good ornaughty.'

　　Soon after five P.M. we had another meal, consisting of a small mugof coffee, and half a slice of brown bread. I devoured my bread anddrank my coffee with relish; but I should have been glad of as muchmore- I was still hungry. Half an hour's recreation succeeded, thenstudy; then the glass of water and the piece of oat-cake, prayers, andbed. Such was my first day at Lowood.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER VI--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　THE next day commenced as before, getting up and dressing byrushlight; but this morning we were obliged to dispense with theceremony of washing; the water in the pitchers was frozen. A changehad taken place in the weather the preceding evening, and a keennorth-east wind, whistling through the crevices of our bedroom windowsall night long, had made us shiver in our beds, and turned thecontents of the ewers to ice.

　　Before the long hour and a half of prayers and Bible-reading wasover, I felt ready to perish with cold. Breakfast-time came at last,and this morning the porridge was not burnt; the quality waseatable, the quantity small. How small my portion seemed! I wishedit had been doubled.

　　In the course of the day I was enrolled a member of the fourthclass, and regular tasks and occupations were assigned me: hitherto, Ihad only been a spectator of the proceedings at Lowood; I was now tobecome an actor therein. At first, being little accustomed to learn byheart, the lessons appeared to me both long and difficult; thefrequent change from task to task, too, bewildered me; and I wasglad when, about three o'clock in the afternoon, Miss Smith put intomy hands a border of muslin two yards long, together with needle,thimble, etc., and sent me to sit in a quiet corner of the schoolroom,with directions to hem the same. At that hour most of the otherswere sewing likewise; but one class still stood round Miss Scatcherd'schair reading, and as all was quiet, the subject of their lessonscould be heard, together with the manner in which each girlacquitted herself, and the animadversions or commendations of MissScatcherd on the performance. It was English history: among thereaders I observed my acquaintance of the verandah: at thecommencement of the lesson, her place had been at the top of theclass, but for some error of pronunciation, or some inattention tostops, she was suddenly sent to the very bottom. Even in thatobscure position, Miss Scatcherd continued to make her an object ofconstant notice; she was continually addressing to her such phrases asthe following:-

　　'Burns' (such it seems was her name: the girls here were all calledby their surnames, as boys are elsewhere), 'Burns, you are standing onthe side of your shoe; turn your toes out immediately.' 'Burns, youpoke your chin most unpleasantly; draw it in.' 'Burns, I insist onyour holding your head up; I will not have you before me in thatattitude,' etc. etc.

　　A chapter having been read through twice, the books were closed andthe girls examined. The lesson had comprised part of the reign ofCharles I, and there were sundry questions about tonnage andpoundage and ship-money, which most of them appeared unable to answer;still, every little difficulty was solved instantly when it reachedBurns: her memory seemed to have retained the substance of the wholelesson, and she was ready with answers on every point. I keptexpecting that Miss Scatcherd would praise her attention; but, insteadof that, she suddenly cried out-

　　'You dirty, disagreeable girl! you have never cleaned your nailsthis morning!'

　　Burns made no answer: I wondered at her silence.

　　'Why,' thought I, 'does she not explain that she could neitherclean her nails nor wash her face, as the water was frozen?'

　　My attention was now called off by Miss Smith desiring me to hold askein of thread: while she was winding it, she talked to me fromtime to time, asking whether I had ever been at school before, whetherI could mark, stitch, knit, etc.; till she dismissed me, I could notpursue my observations on Miss Scatcherd's movements. When Ireturned to my seat, that lady was just delivering an order of which Idid not catch the import; but Burns immediately left the class, andgoing into the small inner room where the books were kept, returned inhalf a minute, carrying in her hand a bundle of twigs tied together atone end. This ominous tool she presented to Miss Scatcherd with arespectful curtsey; then she quietly, and without being told, unloosedher pinafore, and the teacher instantly and sharply inflicted on herneck a dozen strokes with the bunch of twigs. Not a tear rose toBurns's eye; and, while I paused from my sewing, because my fingersquivered at this spectacle with a sentiment of unavailing and impotentanger, not a feature of her pensive face altered its ordinaryexpression.

　　'Hardened girl!' exclaimed Miss Scatcherd; 'nothing can correct youof your slatternly habits: carry the rod away.'

　　Burns obeyed: I looked at her narrowly as she emerged from thebook-closet; she was just putting back her handkerchief into herpocket, and the trace of a tear glistened on her thin cheek.

　　The play-hour in the evening I thought the pleasantest fractionof the day at Lowood: the bit of bread, the draught of coffeeswallowed at five o'clock had revived vitality, if it had notsatisfied hunger: the long restraint of the day was slackened; theschoolroom felt warmer than in the morning- its fires being allowed toburn a little more brightly, to supply, in some measure, the placeof candles, not yet introduced: the ruddy gloaming, the licenseduproar, the confusion of many voices gave one a welcome sense ofliberty.

　　On the evening of the day on which I had seen Miss Scatcherd flogher pupil, Burns, I wandered as usual among the forms and tables andlaughing groups without a companion, yet not feeling lonely: when Ipassed the windows, I now and then lifted a blind, and looked out;it snowed fast, a drift was already forming against the lower panes;putting my ear close to the window, I could distinguish from thegleeful tumult within, the disconsolate moan of the wind outside.

　　Probably, if I had lately left a good home and kind parents, thiswould have been the hour when I should most keenly have regrettedthe separation; that wind would then have saddened my heart, thisobscure chaos would have disturbed my peace! as it was, I derived fromboth a strange excitement, and reckless and feverish, I wished thewind to howl more wildly, the gloom to deepen to darkness, and theconfusion to rise to clamour.

　　Jumping over forms, and creeping under tables, I made my way to oneof the fire-places; there, kneeling by the high wire fender, I foundBurns, absorbed, silent, abstracted from all round her by thecompanionship of a book, which she read by the dim glare of theembers.

　　'Is it still Rasselas?' I asked, coming behind her.

　　'Yes,' she said, 'and I have just finished it.'

　　And in five minutes more she shut it up. I was glad of this.

　　'Now,' thought I, 'I can perhaps get her to talk.' I sat down byher on the floor.

　　'What is your name besides Burns?'

　　'Helen.'

　　'Do you come a long way from here?'

　　'I come from a place farther north, quite on the borders ofScotland.'

　　'Will you ever go back?'

　　'I hope so; but nobody can be sure of the future.'

　　'You must wish to leave Lowood?'

　　'No! why should I? I was sent to Lowood to get an education; and itwould be of no use going away until I have attained that object.'

　　'But that teacher, Miss Scatcherd, is so cruel to you?'

　　'Cruel? Not at all! She is severe: she dislikes my faults.'

　　'And if I were in your place I should dislike her; I shouldresist her. If she struck me with that rod, I should get it from herhand; I should break it under her nose.'

　　'Probably you would do nothing of the sort: but if you did, Mr.Brocklehurst would expel you from the school; that would be a greatgrief to your relations. It is far better to endure patiently asmart which nobody feels but yourself, than to commit a hasty actionwhose evil consequences will extend to all connected with you; andbesides, the Bible bids us return good for evil.'

　　'But then it seems disgraceful to be flogged, and to be sent tostand in the middle of a room full of people; and you are such a greatgirl: I am far younger than you, and I could not bear it.'

　　'Yet it would be your duty to bear it, if you could not avoid it:it is weak and silly to say you cannot bear what it is your fate to berequired to bear.'

　　I heard her with wonder: I could not comprehend this doctrine ofendurance; and still less could I understand or sympathise with theforbearance she expressed for her chastiser. Still I felt that HelenBurns considered things by a light invisible to my eyes. I suspectedshe might be right and I wrong; but I would not ponder the matterdeeply; like Felix, I put it off to a more convenient season.

　　'You say you have faults, Helen: what are they? To me you seem verygood.'

　　'Then learn from me, not to judge by appearances: I am, as MissScatcherd said, slatternly; I seldom put, and never keep, things inorder; I am careless; I forget rules; I read when I should learn mylessons; I have no method; and sometimes I say, like you, I cannotbear to be subjected to systematic arrangements. This is all veryprovoking to Miss Scatcherd, who is naturally neat, punctual, andparticular.'

　　'And cross and cruel,' I added; but Helen Burns would not admitmy addition: she kept silence.
