　　CHAPTER XII

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　THE promise of a smooth career, which my first calm introduction toThornfield Hall seemed to pledge, was not belied on a longeracquaintance with the place and its inmates. Mrs. Fairfax turned outto be what she appeared, a placid-tempered, kind-natured woman, ofcompetent education and average intelligence. My pupil was a livelychild, who had been spoilt and indulged, and therefore was sometimeswayward; but as she was committed entirely to my care, and noinjudicious interference from any quarter ever thwarted my plans forher improvement, she soon forgot her little freaks, and becameobedient and teachable. She had no great talents, no marked traitsof character, no peculiar development of feeling or taste which raisedher one inch above the ordinary level of childhood; but neither hadshe any deficiency or vice which sunk her below it. She madereasonable progress, entertained for me a vivacious, though perhapsnot very profound, affection; and by her simplicity, gay prattle,and efforts to please, inspired me, in return, with a degree ofattachment sufficient to make us both content in each other's society.

　　This, par parenthese, will be thought cool language by personswho entertain solemn doctrines about the angelic nature of children,and the duty of those charged with their education to conceive forthem an idolatrous devotion: but I am not writing to flatterparental egotism, to echo cant, or prop up humbug; I am merely tellingthe truth. I felt a conscientious solicitude for Adele's welfare andprogress, and a quiet liking for her little self: just as Icherished towards Mrs. Fairfax a thankfulness for her kindness, anda pleasure in her society proportionate to the tranquil regard she hadfor me, and the moderation of her mind and character.

　　Anybody may blame me who likes, when I add further, that, now andthen, when I took a walk by myself in the grounds; when I went down tothe gates and looked through them along the road; or when, while Adeleplayed with her nurse, and Mrs. Fairfax made jellies in the storeroom,I climbed the three staircases, raised the trap-door of the attic, andhaving reached the leads, looked out afar over sequestered field andhill, and along dim sky-line- that then I longed for a power of visionwhich might overpass that limit; which might reach the busy world,towns, regions full of life I had heard of but never seen- that then Idesired more of practical experience than I possessed; more ofintercourse with my kind, of acquaintance with variety of character,than was here within my reach. I valued what was good in Mrs. Fairfax,and what was good in Adele; but I believed in the existence of otherand more vivid kinds of goodness, and what I believed in I wished tobehold.

　　Who blames me? Many, no doubt; and I shall be calleddiscontented. I could not help it: the restlessness was in mynature; it agitated me to pain sometimes. Then my sole relief was towalk along the corridor of the third storey, backwards and forwards,safe in the silence and solitude of the spot, and allow my mind'seye to dwell on whatever bright visions rose before it- and,certainly, they were many and glowing; to let my heart be heaved bythe exultant movement, which, while it swelled it in trouble, expandedit with life; and, best of all, to open my inward ear to a tale thatwas never ended- a tale my imagination created, and narratedcontinuously; quickened with all of incident, life, fire, feeling,that I desired and had not in my actual existence.

　　It is in vain to say human beings ought to be satisfied withtranquillity: they must have action; and they will make it if theycannot find it. Millions are condemned to a stiller doom than mine,and millions are in silent revolt against their lot. Nobody knowshow many rebellions besides political rebellions ferment in the massesof life which people earth. Women are supposed to be very calmgenerally: but women feel just as men feel; they need exercise fortheir faculties, and a field for their efforts, as much as theirbrothers do; they suffer from too rigid a restraint, too absolute astagnation, precisely as men would suffer; and it is narrow-mindedin their more privileged fellow-creatures to say that they ought toconfine themselves to making puddings and knitting stockings, toplaying on the piano and embroidering bags. It is thoughtless tocondemn them, or laugh at them, if they seek to do more or learnmore than custom has pronounced necessary for their sex.

　　When thus alone, I not unfrequently heard Grace Poole's laugh:the same peal, the same low, slow ha! ha! which, when first heard, hadthrilled me: I heard, too, her eccentric murmurs; stranger than herlaugh. There were days when she was quite silent; but there wereothers when I could not account for the sounds she made. Sometimes Isaw her: she would come out of her room with a basin, or a plate, or atray in her hand, go down to the kitchen and shortly return, generally(oh, romantic reader, forgive me for telling the plain truth!) bearinga pot of porter. Her appearance always acted as a damper to thecuriosity raised by her oral oddities: hard-featured and staid, shehad no point to which interest could attach. I made some attempts todraw her into conversation, but she seemed a person of few words: amonosyllabic reply usually cut short every effort of that sort.

　　The other members of the household, viz., John and his wife, Leahthe housemaid, and Sophie the French nurse, were decent people; but inno respect remarkable; with Sophie I used to talk French, andsometimes I asked her questions about her native country; but shewas not of a descriptive or narrative turn, and generally gave suchvapid and confused answers as were calculated rather to check thanencourage inquiry.

　　October, November, December passed away. One afternoon inJanuary, Mrs. Fairfax had begged a holiday for Adele, because shehad a cold; and, as Adele seconded the request with an ardour thatreminded me how precious occasional holidays had been to me in myown childhood, I accorded it, deeming that I did well in showingpliability on the point. It was a fine, calm day, though very cold;I was tired of sitting still in the library through a whole longmorning: Mrs. Fairfax had just written a letter which was waiting tobe posted, so I put on my bonnet and cloak and volunteered to carry itto Hay; the distance, two miles, would be a pleasant winterafternoon walk. Having seen Adele comfortably seated in her littlechair by Mrs. Fairfax's parlour fireside, and given her her best waxdoll (which I usually kept enveloped in silver paper in a drawer) toplay with, and a story-book for a change of amusement; and havingreplied to her 'Revenez bientot, ma bonne amie, ma chere Mdlle.Jeannette,' with a kiss I set out.

　　The ground was hard, the air was still, my road was lonely; Iwalked fast till I got warm, and then I walked slowly to enjoy andanalyse the species of pleasure brooding for me in the hour andsituation. It was three o'clock; the church bell tolled as I passedunder the belfry: the charm of the hour lay in its approachingdimness, in the low-gliding and pale-beaming sun. I was a mile fromThornfield, in a lane noted for wild roses in summer, for nuts andblackberries in autumn, and even now possessing a few coraltreasures in hips and haws, but whose best winter delight lay in itsutter solitude and leafless repose. If a breath of air stirred, itmade no sound here; for there was not a holly, not an evergreen torustle, and the stripped hawthorn and hazel bushes were as still asthe white, worn stones which causewayed the middle of the path. Farand wide, on each side, there were only fields, where no cattle nowbrowsed; and the little brown birds, which stirred occasionally in thehedge, looked like single russet leaves that had forgotten to drop.

　　This lane inclined up-hill all the way to Hay; having reached themiddle, I sat down on a stile which led thence into a field. Gatheringmy mantle about me, and sheltering my hands in my muff, I did not feelthe cold, though it froze keenly; as was attested by a sheet of icecovering the causeway, where a little brooklet, now congealed, hadoverflowed after a rapid thaw some days since. From my seat I couldlook down on Thornfield: the grey and battlemented hall was theprincipal object in the vale below me; its woods and dark rookery roseagainst the, west. I lingered till the sun went down amongst thetrees, and sank crimson and clear behind them. I then turned eastward.

　　On the hill-top above me sat the rising moon; pale yet as acloud, but brightening momentarily, she looked over Hay, which, halflost in trees, sent up a blue smoke from its few chimneys: it wasyet a mile distant, but in the absolute hush I could hear plainlyits thin murmurs of life. My ear, too, felt the flow of currents; inwhat dales and depths I could not tell: but there were many hillsbeyond Hay, and doubtless many becks threading their passes. Thatevening calm betrayed alike the tinkle of the nearest streams, thesough of the most remote.

　　A rude noise broke on these fine ripplings and whisperings, at onceso far away and so clear: a positive tramp, tramp, a metallic clatter,which effaced the soft wave-wanderings; as, in a picture, the solidmass of a crag, or the rough boles of a great oak, drawn in dark andstrong on the foreground, efface the aerial distance of azure hill,sunny horizon, and blended clouds where tint melts into tint.

　　The din was on the causeway: a horse was coming; the windings ofthe lane yet hid it, but it approached. I was just leaving thestile; yet, as the path was narrow, I sat still to let it go by. Inthose days I was young, and all sorts of fancies bright and darktenanted my mind: the memories of nursery stories were there amongstother rubbish; and when they recurred, maturing youth added to thema vigour and vividness beyond what childhood could give. As this horseapproached, and as I watched for it to appear through the dusk, Iremembered certain of Bessie's tales, wherein figured aNorth-of-England spirit called a 'Gytrash,' which, in the form ofhorse, mule, or large dog, haunted solitary ways, and sometimes cameupon belated travellers, as this horse was now coming upon me.

　　It was very near, but not yet in sight; when, in addition to thetramp, tramp, I heard a rush under the hedge, and close down by thehazel stems glided a great dog, whose black and white colour madehim a distinct object against the trees. It was exactly one form ofBessie's Gytrash- a lion-like creature with long hair and a huge head:it passed me, however, quietly enough; not staying to look up, withstrange pretercanine eyes, in my face, as I half expected it would.The horse followed,- a tall steed, and on its back a rider. The man,the human being, broke the spell at once. Nothing ever rode theGytrash: it was always alone; and goblins, to my notions, thoughthey might tenant the dumb carcasses of beasts, could scarce covetshelter in the commonplace human form. No Gytrash was this,- only atraveller taking the short cut to Millcote. He passed, and I wenton; a few steps, and I turned: a sliding sound and an exclamation of'What the deuce is to do now?' and a clattering tumble, arrested myattention. Man and horse were down; they had slipped on the sheet ofice which glazed the causeway. The dog came bounding back, andseeing his master in a predicament, and hearing the horse groan,barked till the evening hills echoed the sound, which was deep inproportion to his magnitude. He snuffed round the prostrate group, andthen he ran up to me; it was all he could do,- there was no other helpat hand to summon. I obeyed him, and walked down to the traveller,by this time struggling himself free of his steed. His efforts were sovigorous, I thought he could not be much hurt; but I asked him thequestion-

　　'Are you injured, sir?'

　　I think he was swearing, but am not certain; however, he waspronouncing some formula which prevented him from replying to medirectly.

　　'Can I do anything?' I asked again.

　　'You must just stand on one side,' he answered as he rose, first tohis knees, and then to his feet. I did; whereupon began a heaving,stamping, clattering process, accompanied by a barking and bayingwhich removed me effectually some yards' distance; but I would notbe driven quite away till I saw the event. This was finally fortunate;the horse was re-established, and the dog was silenced with a 'Down,Pilot!' The traveller now, stooping, felt his foot and leg, as iftrying whether they were sound; apparently something ailed them, forhe halted to the stile whence I had just risen, and sat down.

　　I was in the mood for being useful, or at least officious, I think,for I now drew near him again.

　　'If you are hurt, and want help, sir, I can fetch some one eitherfrom Thornfield Hall or from Hay.'

　　'Thank you: I shall do: I have no broken bones,- only a sprain;'and again he stood up and tried his foot, but the result extorted aninvoluntary 'Ugh!'

　　Something of daylight still lingered, and the moon was waxingbright: I could see him plainly. His figure was enveloped in ariding cloak, fur collared and steel clasped; its details were notapparent, but I traced the general points of middle height andconsiderable breadth of chest. He had a dark face, with stern featuresand a heavy brow; his eyes and gathered eyebrows looked ireful andthwarted just now; he was past youth, but had not reachedmiddle-age; perhaps he might be thirty-five. I felt no fear of him,and but little shyness. Had he been a handsome, heroic-looking younggentleman, I should not have dared to stand thus questioning himagainst his will, and offering my services unasked. I had hardlyever seen a handsome youth; never in my life spoken to one. I had atheoretical reverence and homage for beauty, elegance, gallantry,fascination; but had I met those qualities incarnate in masculineshape, I should have known instinctively that they neither had norcould have sympathy with anything in me, and should have shunnedthem as one would fire, lightning, or anything else that is bright butantipathetic.

　　If even this stranger had smiled and been good-humoured to mewhen I addressed him; if he had put off my offer of assistance gailyand with thanks, I should have gone on my way and not felt anyvocation to renew inquiries: but the frown, the roughness of thetraveller, set me at my ease: I retained my station when he waved tome to go, and announced-

　　'I cannot think of leaving you, sir, at so late an hour, in thissolitary lane, till I see you are fit to mount your horse.'

　　He looked at me when I said this; he had hardly turned his eyesin my direction before.

　　'I should think you ought to be at home yourself,' said he, 'if youhave a home in this neighbourhood: where do you come from?'

　　'From just below; and I am not at all afraid of being out late whenit is moonlight: I will run over to Hay for you with pleasure, ifyou wish it: indeed, I am going there to post a letter.'

　　'You live just below- do you mean at that house with thebattlements?' pointing to Thornfield Hall, on which the moon cast ahoary gleam, bringing it out distinct and pale from the woods, that,by contrast with the western sky, now seemed one mass of shadow.

　　'Yes, sir.'

　　'Whose house is it?'

　　'Mr. Rochester's.'

　　'Do you know Mr. Rochester?'

　　'No, I have never seen him.'

　　'He is not resident, then?'

　　'No.'

　　'Can you tell me where he is?'

　　'I cannot.'

　　'You are not a servant at the hall, of course. You are-' Hestopped, ran his eye over my dress, which, as usual, was quite simple:a black merino cloak, a black beaver bonnet; neither of them half fineenough for a lady's-maid. He seemed puzzled to decide what I was; Ihelped him.

　　'I am the governess.'

　　'Ah, the governess!' he repeated; 'deuce take me, if I had notforgotten! The governess!' and again my raiment underwent scrutiny. Intwo minutes he rose from the stile: his face expressed pain when hetried to move.

　　'I cannot commission you to fetch help,' he said; 'but you may helpme a little yourself, if you will be so kind.'

　　'Yes, sir.'

　　'You have not an umbrella that I can use as a stick?'

　　'No.'

　　'Try to get hold of my horse's bridle and lead him to me: you arenot afraid?'

　　I should have been afraid to touch a horse when alone, but whentold to do it, I was disposed to obey. I put down my muff on thestile, and went up to the tall steed; I endeavoured to catch thebridle, but it was a spirited thing, and would not let me come nearits head; I made effort on effort, though in vain: meantime, I wasmortally afraid of its trampling forefeet. The traveller waited andwatched for some time, and at last he laughed.

　　'I see,' he said, 'the mountain will never be brought to Mahomet,so all you can do is to aid Mahomet to go to the mountain; I mustbeg of you to come here.'

　　I came. 'Excuse me,' he continued: 'necessity compels me to makeyou useful.' He laid a heavy hand on my shoulder, and leaning on mewith some stress, limped to his horse. Having once caught thebridle, he mastered it directly and sprang to his saddle; grimacinggrimly as he made the effort, for it wrenched his sprain.

　　'Now,' said he, releasing his under lip from a hard bite, 'justhand me my whip; it lies there under the hedge.'

　　I sought it and found it.

　　'Thank you; now make haste with the letter to Hay, and return asfast as you can.'

　　A touch of a spurred heel made his horse first start and rear,and then bound away; the dog rushed in his traces; all three vanished,

　　'Like heath that, in the wilderness,

　　The wild wind whirls away.'

　　I took up my muff and walked on. The incident had occurred andwas gone for me: it was an incident of no moment, no romance, nointerest in a sense; yet it marked with change one single hour of amonotonous life. My help had been needed and claimed; I had givenit: I was pleased to have done something; trivial, transitory thoughthe deed was, it was yet an active thing, and I was weary of anexistence all passive. The new face, too, was like a new pictureintroduced to the gallery of memory; and it was dissimilar to allthe others hanging there: firstly, because it was masculine; and,secondly, because it was dark, strong, and stern. I had it stillbefore me when I entered Hay, and slipped the letter into thepost-office; I saw it as I walked fast down-hill all the way home.When I came to the stile, I stopped a minute, looked round andlistened, with an idea that a horse's hoofs might ring on the causewayagain, and that a rider in a cloak, and a Gytrash-like Newfoundlanddog, might be again apparent: I saw only the hedge and a pollardwillow before me, rising up still and straight to meet themoonbeams; I heard only the faintest waft of wind roaming fitful amongthe trees round Thornfield, a mile distant; and when I glanced down inthe direction of the murmur, my eye, traversing the hall-front, caughta light kindling in a window: it reminded me that I was late, and Ihurried on.

　　I did not like re-entering Thornfield. To pass its threshold was toreturn to stagnation; to cross the silent hall, to ascend the darksomestaircase, to seek my own lonely little room, and then to meettranquil Mrs. Fairfax, and spend the long winter evening with her, andher only, was to quell wholly the faint excitement wakened by mywalk,- to slip again over my faculties the viewless fetters of anuniform and too still existence; of an existence whose very privilegesof security and ease I was becoming incapable of appreciating. Whatgood it would have done me at that time to have been tossed in thestorms of an uncertain struggling life, and to have been taught byrough and bitter experience to long for the calm amidst which I nowrepined! Yes, just as much good as it would do a man tired ofsitting still in a 'too easy chair' to take a long walk: and just asnatural was the wish to stir, under my circumstances, as it would beunder his.

　　I lingered at the gates; I lingered on the lawn; I pacedbackwards and forwards on the pavement; the shutters of the glass doorwere closed; I could not see into the interior; and both my eyes andspirit seemed drawn from the gloomy house- from the grey hollow filledwith rayless cells, as it appeared to me- to that sky expandedbefore me,- a blue sea absolved from taint of cloud; the moonascending it in solemn march; her orb seeming to look up as she leftthe hill-tops, from behind which she had come, far and farther belowher, and aspired to the zenith, midnight dark in its fathomlessdepth and measureless distance; and for those trembling stars thatfollowed her course; they made my heart tremble, my veins glow whenI viewed them. Little things recall us to earth; the clock struck inthe hall; that sufficed; I turned from moon and stars, opened aside-door, and went in.

　　The hall was not dark, nor yet was it lit, only by the high-hungbronze lamp; a warm glow suffused both it and the lower steps of theoak staircase. This ruddy shine issued from the great dining-room,whose two-leaved door stood open, and showed a genial fire in thegrate, glancing on marble hearth and brass fire-irons, and revealingpurple draperies and polished furniture, in the most pleasantradiance. It revealed, too, a group near the mantelpiece: I hadscarcely caught it, and scarcely become aware of a cheerful minglingof voices, amongst which I seemed to distinguish the tones of Adele,when the door closed.

　　I hastened to Mrs. Fairfax's room; there was a fire there too,but no candle, and no Mrs. Fairfax. Instead, all alone, sittingupright on the rug, and gazing with gravity at the blaze, I beheld agreat black and white long-haired dog, just like the Gytrash of thelane. It was so like it that I went forward and said- 'Pilot,' and thething got up and came to me and snuffed me. I caressed him, and hewagged his great tail; but he looked an eerie creature to be alonewith, and I could not tell whence he had come. I rang the bell, forI wanted a candle; and I wanted, too, to get an account of thisvisitant. Leah entered.

　　'What dog is this?'

　　'He came with master.'

　　'With whom?'

　　'With master- Mr. Rochester- he is just arrived.'

　　'Indeed! and is Mrs. Fairfax with him?'

　　'Yes, and Miss Adele; they are in the dining-room, and John is gonefor a surgeon; for master has had an accident; his horse fell andhis ankle is sprained.'

　　'Did the horse fall in Hay Lane?'

　　'Yes, coming down-hill; it slipped on some ice.'

　　'Ah! Bring me a candle, will you, Leah?'

　　Leah brought it; she entered, followed by Mrs. Fairfax, whorepeated the news; adding that Mr. Carter the surgeon was come, andwas now with Mr. Rochester: then she hurried out to give ordersabout tea, and I went upstairs to take off my things.

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　CHAPTER XIII

　　--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

　　MR. ROCHESTER, it seems, by the surgeon's orders, went to bed earlythat night; nor did he rise soon next morning. When he did comedown, it was to attend to business: his agent and some of histenants were arrived, and waiting to speak with him.

　　Adele and I had now to vacate the library: it would be in dailyrequisition as a reception-room for callers. A fire was lit in anapartment upstairs, and there I carried our books, and arranged it forthe future schoolroom. I discerned in the course of the morning thatThornfield Hall was a changed place: no longer silent as a church,it echoed every hour or two to a knock at the door, or a clang ofthe bell: steps, too, often traversed the hall, and new voices spokein different keys below; a rill from the outer world was flowingthrough it; it had a master: for my part, I liked it better.

　　Adele was not easy to teach that day; she could not apply: she keptrunning to the door and looking over the banisters to see if she couldget a glimpse of Mr. Rochester; then she coined pretexts to godownstairs, in order, as I shrewdly suspected, to visit the library,where I knew she was not wanted; then, when I got a little angry,and made her sit still, she continued to talk incessantly of her 'ami,Monsieur Edouard Fairfax de Rochester,' as she dubbed him (I had notbefore heard his prenomens), and to conjecture what presents he hadbrought her: for it appears he had intimated the night before, thatwhen his luggage came from Millcote, there would be found amongst it alittle box in whose contents she had an interest.

　　'Et cela doit signifier,' said she, 'qu'il y aura la dedans uncadeau pour moi, et peut-etre pour vous aussi, mademoiselle.Monsieur a parle de vous: il m'a demande le nom de ma gouvernante,et si elle n'etait pas une petite personne, assez mince et un peupale. J'ai dit qu'oui: car c'est vrai, n'est-ce pas, mademoiselle?'

　　I and my pupil dined as usual in Mrs. Fairfax's parlour; theafternoon was wild and snowy, and we passed it in the schoolroom. Atdark I allowed Adele to put away books and work, and to rundownstairs; for, from the comparative silence below, and from thecessation of appeals to the door-bell, I conjectured that Mr.Rochester was now at liberty. Left alone, I walked to the window;but nothing was to be seen thence: twilight and snowflakes togetherthickened the air, and hid the very shrubs on the lawn. I let down thecurtain and went back to the fireside.

　　In the clear embers I was tracing a view, not unlike a picture Iremembered to have seen of the castle of Heidelberg, on the Rhine,when Mrs. Fairfax came in, breaking up by her entrance the fierymosaic I had been piecing together, and scattering too some heavyunwelcome thoughts that were beginning to throng on my solitude.

　　'Mr. Rochester would be glad if you and your pupil would take teawith him in the drawing-room this evening,' said she: 'he has beenso much engaged all day that he could not ask to see you before.'

　　'When is his tea-time?' I inquired.

　　'Oh, at six o'clock: he keeps early hours in the country. You hadbetter change your frock now; I will go with you and fasten it. Hereis a candle.'

　　'Is it necessary to change my frock?'

　　'Yes, you had better: I always dress for the evening when Mr.Rochester is here.'

　　This additional ceremony seemed somewhat stately; however, Irepaired to my room, and, with Mrs. Fairfax's aid, replaced my blackstuff dress by one of black silk; the best and the only additional oneI had, except one of light grey, which, in my Lowood notions of thetoilette, I thought too fine to be worn, except on first-rateoccasions.

　　'You want a brooch,' said Mrs. Fairfax. I had a single little pearlornament which Miss Temple gave me as a parting keepsake: I put it on,and then we went downstairs. Unused as I was to strangers, it wasrather a trial to appear thus formally summoned in Mr. Rochester'spresence. I let Mrs. Fairfax precede me into the dining-room, and keptin her shade as we crossed that apartment; and, passing the arch,whose curtain was now dropped, entered the elegant recess beyond.

　　Two wax candles stood lighted on the table, and two on themantelpiece; basking in the light and heat of a superb fire, layPilot- Adele knelt near him. Half reclined on a couch appeared Mr.Rochester, his foot supported by the cushion; he was looking atAdele and the dog: the fire shone full on his face. I knew mytraveller with his broad and jetty eyebrows; his square forehead, madesquarer by the horizontal sweep of his black hair. I recognised hisdecisive nose, more remarkable for character than beauty; his fullnostrils, denoting, I thought, choler; his grim mouth, chin, andjaw- yes, all three were very grim, and no mistake. His shape, nowdivested of cloak, I perceived harmonised in squareness with hisphysiognomy: I suppose it was a good figure in the athletic sense ofthe term- broad chested and thin flanked, though neither tall norgraceful.

　　Mr. Rochester must have been aware of the entrance of Mrs.Fairfax and myself; but it appeared he was not in the mood to noticeus, for he never lifted his head as we approached.

　　'Here is Miss Eyre, sir,' said Mrs. Fairfax, in her quiet way. Hebowed, still not taking his eyes from the group of the dog and child.

　　'Let Miss Eyre be seated,' said he: and there was something inthe forced stiff bow, in the impatient yet formal tone, which seemedfurther to express, 'What the deuce is it to me whether Miss Eyre bethere or not? At this moment I am not disposed to accost her.'

　　I sat down quite disembarrassed. A reception of finished politenesswould probably have confused me: I could not have returned or repaidit by answering grace and elegance on my part; but harsh capricelaid me under no obligation; on the contrary, a decent quiescence,under the freak of manner, gave me the advantage. Besides, theeccentricity of the proceeding was piquant: I felt interested to seehow he would go on.

　　He went on as a statue would, that is, he neither spoke normoved. Mrs. Fairfax seemed to think it necessary that some oneshould be amiable, and she began to talk. Kindly, as usual- and, asusual, rather trite- she condoled with him on the pressure of businesshe had had all day; on the annoyance it must have been to him withthat painful sprain: then she commended his patience andperseverance in going through with it.

　　'Madam, I should like some tea,' was the sole rejoinder she got.She hastened to ring the bell; and when the tray came, she proceededto arrange the cups, spoons, etc., with assiduous celerity. I andAdele went to the table; but the master did not leave his couch.

　　'Will you hand Mr. Rochester's cup?' said Mrs. Fairfax to me;'Adele might perhaps spill it.'

　　I did as requested. As he took the cup from my hand, Adele,thinking the moment propitious for making a request in my favour,cried out-

　　'N'est-ce pas, monsieur, qu'il y a un cadeau pour Mademoiselle Eyredans votre petit coffre?'

　　'Who talks of cadeaux?' said he gruffly. 'Did you expect a present,Miss Eyre? Are you fond of presents?' and he searched my face witheyes that I saw were dark, irate, and piercing.

　　'I hardly know, sir; I have little experience of them: they aregenerally thought pleasant things.'
